modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/dedicated/create-dedicated-cloud-cluster.adoc, before:

= Create a Dedicated Cloud Cluster
:description: Learn how to create a Dedicated cluster.
:page-aliases: cloud:create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/provision-a-dedicated-cluster/index.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws.adoc, get-started:cluster-types/dedicated/create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws.adoc

After you log in to https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud^], you land on the *Clusters* page. This page lists all the clusters in your organization. 

== Create a Dedicated cluster

. On the Clusters page, click *Create cluster*, then click *Create Dedicated cluster*.
+
Enter a cluster name, then select the resource group, cloud provider (AWS, GCP, or Azure), xref:reference:tiers/dedicated-tiers.adoc[region, tier], availability, and Redpanda version.

+
[NOTE]
====
* If you plan to create a private network in your own VPC, select the region where your VPC is located.
* Three availability zones provide two backups in case one availability zone goes down.
====

. Click *Next*.
. On the Network page, enter the connection type: *Public* or *Private*. For private networks:
** Your network name is used to identify this network.
** For a xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR range], choose one that does not overlap with your existing VPCs or your Redpanda network.
+
NOTE: Private networks require either a VPC peering connection or a private connectivity service, such as xref:networking:configure-privatelink-in-cloud-ui.adoc[AWS PrivateLink], xref:networking:configure-private-service-connect-in-cloud-ui.adoc[GCP Private Service Connect], or xref:networking:azure-private-link.adoc[Azure Private Link]. 

. Click *Create*.

After the cluster is created, you can click the cluster name on the *Clusters* page to see the overview for it.

Commit message:

remove azure ff from this PR

modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/dedicated/create-dedicated-cloud-cluster.adoc, after:

= Create a Dedicated Cloud Cluster
:description: Learn how to create a Dedicated cluster.
:page-aliases: cloud:create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/provision-a-dedicated-cluster/index.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws.adoc, get-started:cluster-types/dedicated/create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws.adoc

After you log in to https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud^], you land on the *Clusters* page. This page lists all the clusters in your organization. 

== Create a Dedicated cluster

. On the Clusters page, click *Create cluster*, then click *Create Dedicated cluster*.
+
Enter a cluster name, then select the resource group, cloud provider (AWS, GCP, or Azure), xref:reference:tiers/dedicated-tiers.adoc[region, tier], availability, and Redpanda version.

+
[NOTE]
====
* If you plan to create a private network in your own VPC, select the region where your VPC is located.
* Three availability zones provide two backups in case one availability zone goes down.
====
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
To unlock this feature for Azure, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda support^]. 
====

. Click *Next*.
. On the Network page, enter the connection type: *Public* or *Private*. For private networks:
** Your network name is used to identify this network.
** For a xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR range], choose one that does not overlap with your existing VPCs or your Redpanda network.
+
NOTE: Private networks require either a VPC peering connection or a private connectivity service, such as xref:networking:configure-privatelink-in-cloud-ui.adoc[AWS PrivateLink], xref:networking:configure-private-service-connect-in-cloud-ui.adoc[GCP Private Service Connect], or xref:networking:azure-private-link.adoc[Azure Private Link]. 

. Click *Create*.

After the cluster is created, you can click the cluster name on the *Clusters* page to see the overview for it.
