modules/get-started/pages/cloud-overview.adoc, before:

= Redpanda Cloud Overview
:description: Learn about Redpanda Serverless, Dedicated, and Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC) clusters.
:page-aliases: cloud:dedicated-byoc.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/dedicated-byoc.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/cloud-overview.adoc


Redpanda Cloud is a complete data streaming platform delivered as a fully-managed service with automated upgrades and patching, data and partition balancing, and 24x7 support. It continuously monitors and maintains your clusters along with the underlying infrastructure to meet strict performance, availability, reliability, and security requirements. All Redpanda Cloud clusters are deployed with an integrated glossterm:Redpanda Console[].

TIP: For more detailed information about the Redpanda platform, see xref:get-started:intro-to-events.adoc[] and xref:get-started:architecture.adoc[].

== Cluster types

Redpanda offers three types of fully-managed cloud clusters:

* <<Serverless>>: Clusters hosted in Redpanda Cloud. This is the fastest and easiest way to start data streaming. 
* <<Dedicated Cloud>>: Single-tenant clusters hosted in Redpanda Cloud. This provides more control over your deployment. 
* <<Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC)>>: Clusters hosted in your private cloud. This provides more control over your deployment and offers full data sovereignty. 
+
NOTE: With standard BYOC clusters, Redpanda manages security policies and resources for your VPC, including service accounts, subnetworks, IAM roles, firewall rules, and storage buckets. For the most security, you can manage these resources yourself with a xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc[customer-managed VPC].

=== Serverless

With Serverless clusters, you host your data in Redpanda's VPC, and Redpanda handles automatic scaling, provisioning, operations, and maintenance. This is a production-ready deployment option with a cluster available instantly. There is no base cost, and with pay-as-you-go billing after the free trial, you only pay for what you consume. You can view detailed billing activity for each cluster and edit payment methods on the *Billing* page. 

==== Sign up for Serverless

To start using Serverless, https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda/cloud-trial#serverless[sign up for a free trial^]. New trials receive $100 (USD) in free credits to spend in the first 14 days. This should be enough to run Redpanda with reasonable throughput. No credit card is required for a trial. To continue using your Serverless cluster after the free trial, add a credit card and pay as you go. 

NOTE: Serverless is currently in a limited availability (LA) release with xref:get-started:cluster-types/serverless.adoc#limits[usage limits]. During LA, existing clusters can scale to the usage limits, but new clusters may need to wait for availability.

=== Dedicated Cloud

With Dedicated clusters, you host your data on Redpanda cloud resources (AWS, GCP, or Azure), and Redpanda handles provisioning, operations, and maintenance. Dedicated clusters are single-tenant deployments that support private networking (for example, VPC peering to talk over private IPs) for better data isolation.
When you create a Dedicated cluster, you select the supported xref:reference:tiers/dedicated-tiers.adoc[tier] that meets your compute and storage needs. 

==== Sign up for Dedicated

To start using Dedicated, sign up for a free trial on the AWS Marketplace. New trials receive $300 (USD) in free credits to spend in the first 30 days. AWS Marketplace charges for anything beyond $300 unless you cancel the subscription. After 30 days, you can continue using your Dedicated cluster without any commitment, only paying for what you consume.

You can also contact https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda?section=enterprise-trial[Redpanda sales^] to request a private offer for monthly or annual committed use. With a usage-based billing commitment, you sign up for a monthly or an annual minimum spend amount. You can then use xref:billing:gcp-commit.adoc[Google Cloud Marketplace] or xref:billing:aws-commit.adoc[AWS Marketplace] to quickly provision Dedicated Cloud clusters, and you can view invoices and manage your subscription in the marketplace.

=== Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC)

With BYOC clusters, you deploy Redpanda in your own cloud (AWS, GCP, or Azure), and all data is
contained in your own environment. This provides an additional layer of security and isolation. When you create a BYOC cluster, you select the supported xref:reference:tiers/byoc-tiers.adoc[tier] that meets your compute and storage needs. Redpanda handles provisioning, operations, and maintenance. See also: <<BYOC architecture>>.

==== Sign up for BYOC

To start using BYOC, contact https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda?section=enterprise-trial[Redpanda sales^] to request a private offer. You are billed directly or through Google Cloud Marketplace or AWS Marketplace. 

== Serverless vs Dedicated/BYOC

Serverless clusters are a good fit for the following:

* Starter and growing workloads
* Spiky workloads (that is, development environments, systems that only occasionally get busy, or workloads that come and go)
* Fast and dynamic cluster creation: you can use a Serverless cluster as an isolated container for topics

With Serverless (or if you sign up for Dedicated through the AWS Marketplace), you only pay for what you consume, without any commitment. A cluster is created instantly, so you can surface it in your applications (for example, for tenant isolation). If your workload increases, you can migrate it to a Dedicated or BYOC cluster.

Dedicated and BYOC clusters offer the following features:

* Single-zone or multi-zone availability (a multi-zone cluster provides higher resiliency in the event of a failure in one of the zones)
* Private networking using VPC peering or a private connectivity service, such as AWS PrivateLink, GCP Private Service Connect, or Azure Private Link. 
* Ability to export metrics to a 3rd-party monitoring system
* Managed connectors
* Higher limits and quotas (see xref:get-started:cluster-types/serverless.adoc#limits[Serverless limits])

Consider Dedicated or BYOC if you need any of the following:

* Control over the deployment
* Private networking
* Workloads with consistently-high throughput

== Shared responsibility model

The Redpanda Cloud shared responsibility model lists the security ownership areas for Redpanda and customers. Responsibilities depend on the type of deployment. 

[tabs]
=====
Dedicated::
+
--
|===
| Resource | Redpanda responsibility | Customer responsibility

| Redpanda upgrades and hotfixes | &#10003; |  
| Cost management and attribution | &#10003; |   
| Software vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |    
| Infrastructure vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |   
| IAM (roles, service accounts, access segmentation) | &#10003; |  
| Compute | &#10003; |   
| VPC (subnets, routing, firewall) | &#10003; |   
| VPC peering | &#10003; |  
| VPC private links (service endpoint) | &#10003; |    
| VPC private links (consumer endpoint) |  | &#10003; 
| Local storage | &#10003; |   
| Tiered Storage | &#10003; |  
| Control plane | &#10003; |  
| Access controls and audit | &#10003; |  
| Managed disaster recovery |  | &#10003; 
| Observability and monitoring (SLOs, SLIs, tracing, alerting, runbooks) | &#10003; |   
| Availability SLA | &#10003; |  
| Proactive threat detection | &#10003; |  
| Static secret rotation | &#10003; |  
| Incident response | &#10003; |   
| Resilience verification  | &#10003; |
| Kafka Connect infrastructure  | &#10003; |
| Kafka Connect tasks state  |  | &#10003;
|===

--
BYOC::
+
--
|===
| Resource | Redpanda responsibility | Customer responsibility

| Redpanda upgrades and hotfixes | &#10003; |   
| Cost management and attribution | &#10003; | &#10003; 
| Software vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |  
| Infrastructure vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |   
| IAM (roles, service accounts, access segmentation) | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Compute | &#10003; |    
| VPC (subnets, routing, firewall) | &#10003; | &#10003; 
| VPC peering |  | &#10003;  
| VPC private links (service endpoint) | &#10003; |  
| VPC private links (consumer endpoint) |  | &#10003;  
| Local storage | &#10003; |  
| Tiered Storage | &#10003; |  
| Control plane | &#10003; |     
| Access controls and audit | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Managed disaster recovery |  | &#10003; 
| Observability and monitoring (SLOs, SLIs, tracing, alerting, runbooks) | &#10003; |    
| Availability SLA | &#10003; (subject to required access to customer resources) |  
| Proactive threat detection | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Static secret rotation | &#10003; |  
| Incident response | &#10003; |     
| Resilience verification  | &#10003; |
| Kafka Connect infrastructure | &#10003; | &#10003;
| Kafka Connect tasks state  |  | &#10003; |
|===

--
BYOC with customer-managed VPC::
+
--
|===
| Resource | Redpanda responsibility | Customer responsibility

| Redpanda upgrades and hotfixes | &#10003; |   
| Cost management and attribution | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Software vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |   
| Infrastructure vulnerability remediation | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| IAM (roles, service accounts, access segmentation) |  | &#10003;  
| Compute | &#10003; |   
| VPC (subnets, routing, firewall) |  | &#10003;  
| VPC peering |  | &#10003;  
| VPC private links (service endpoint) | &#10003; |   
| VPC private links (consumer endpoint) |  | &#10003;  
| Local storage | &#10003; |   
| Tiered Storage |  | &#10003;  
| Control plane | &#10003; |   
| Access controls and audit | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Managed disaster recovery |  |  &#10003; 
| Observability and monitoring (SLOs, SLIs, tracing, alerting, runbooks) | &#10003; | &#10003; (for VPC components and cloud storage buckets/containers managed by customer) 
| Availability SLA | &#10003; (subject to required access to customer resources) | &#10003;  
| Proactive threat detection | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Static secret rotation | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Incident response | &#10003; |   
| Resilience verification | &#10003; |
| Kafka Connect infrastructure | &#10003; | &#10003;
| Kafka Connect tasks state  |  | &#10003; |
|===

--
=====

== Maintenance windows

By default, Redpanda Cloud upgrades take place on Tuesdays. Optionally, on the **Cluster settings** page, you can select a window of specific off-hours for your business for Redpanda to apply updates. All times are in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). Updates may start at any time during that window. 

== Redpanda Cloud architecture

When you sign up for a Redpanda account, Redpanda creates an organization for you. Your organization contains all your Redpanda resources, including your clusters and networks. Within your organization, Redpanda creates a default resource group to contain your resources. You can rename this resource group, and you can create more resource groups. For example, you may want different resource groups for production and testing. 

For high availability, Redpanda Cloud uses a control plane and data plane architecture. 

* *Control plane*: This is where most cluster management, operations, and maintenance takes place. The control plane enforces rules in the data plane.

* *Data plane*: This is where your cluster lives. The term _data plane_ is used interchangeably with _cluster_. 

* *Agent*: Redpanda uses an agent to manage the data plane from the control plane.

Clusters are configured and maintained in the control plane, but they remain available even if the network connection to the control plane is lost.

NOTE: In the user interface, when you're at the organization (org) level or the resource group level, but you haven't yet selected a cluster, you're in the control plane. This is where you can select, create, and delete clusters, resource groups, and networks. When you're at the cluster level working with topics, consumer groups, and connectors, you're in the data plane.

=== BYOC architecture

The following diagram shows a BYOC architecture, where you deploy the data plane in your own VPC. All network connections into the data plane take place through
either a public endpoint or a VPC peering network connection. Sensitive data and credentials never leave the data plane. 

image::shared:d_c_plane.png[Data plane and control plane]

A BYOC cluster is initially set up from the control plane. This is a two-step process performed by `rpk cloud byoc apply`:

. You bootstrap a virtual machine (VM) in your VPC. 
+
This VM spins up the agent and the required infrastructure. Redpanda assigns the necessary IAM policies required to run the agent and configures workload identity. That is, it configures independent IAM roles for each workload, with only the permissions each workload requires. 

. The agent communicates with the control plane to pull the cluster specifications. 
+
After the agent is up and running, it connects to the control plane and starts dequeuing and applying cluster specifications that provision, configure, and maintain clusters. The agent is in constant communication with the control plane,
receiving and applying cluster specifications and exchanging cluster metadata. Agents are authenticated and authorized through opaque and ephemeral tokens, and
they have dedicated job queues in the control plane. 
+
Agents also manage VPC peering networks. One agent manages each network resource at a time.
+
image::shared:byoc_apply.png[cloud_byoc_apply]

== Redpanda Cloud vs Self-Managed feature compatibility

Redpanda Cloud deployments do not support the following functionality available in Redpanda Self-Managed deployments:

- FIPS-compliance mode
- Data transforms (currently in beta for Redpanda Cloud)
- Remote Read Replicas (currently in beta for Redpanda Cloud)
- Kafka API OIDC authentication (however, Redpanda Cloud does support xref:security:cloud-authentication.adoc#single-sign-on[user authentication to an organization with SSO])
- Kerberos authentication
- Redpanda Console topic documentation
- Setting `auto_create_topics_enabled=true`
- Admin API
- The following `rpk` commands:

** `rpk connect` commands
** `rpk redpanda` commands
** `rpk cluster config`
** `rpk cluster health`
** `rpk cluster license`
** `rpk cluster maintenance`
** `rpk cluster partitions`
** `rpk cluster self-test`
** `rpk cluster storage`
** `rpk generate app` (supported in Serverless clusters)
** `rpk security user` (supported in Serverless clusters)
** `rpk topic describe-storage` (all other `rpk topic` commands are supported on both Redpanda Cloud and self-hosted)
** `rpk transform` commands (currently in beta for Redpanda Cloud)

NOTE: The `rpk cloud` commands are not supported in self-hosted deployments.

== Next steps
* xref:get-started:cluster-types/serverless.adoc[Create a Serverless Cluster]
* xref:get-started:cluster-types/dedicated/create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws.adoc[Create a Dedicated Cloud Cluster]
* xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/index.adoc[Create a BYOC Cluster]

include::shared:partial$suggested-reading.adoc[]

* https://redpanda.com/blog/deploy-redpanda-clusters-cloud-aws-gcp[Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC): best of both worlds^]

* https://redpanda.com/blog/data-sovereignty-fully-managed-cloud-byoc[A middle path for data sovereignty: Bring Your Own Cloud^]

include::shared:partial$suggested-video.adoc[]

* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gVlzsJAYT64&ab_channel=RedpandaData[YouTube - What is Redpanda BYOC? (3 mins)^]

Commit message:

update rpk cloud byoc (#39)
* #2226 update rpk cloud byoc

* minor nav update

modules/get-started/pages/cloud-overview.adoc, after:

= Redpanda Cloud Overview
:description: Learn about Redpanda Serverless, Dedicated, and Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC) clusters.
:page-aliases: cloud:dedicated-byoc.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/dedicated-byoc.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/cloud-overview.adoc


Redpanda Cloud is a complete data streaming platform delivered as a fully-managed service with automated upgrades and patching, data and partition balancing, and 24x7 support. It continuously monitors and maintains your clusters along with the underlying infrastructure to meet strict performance, availability, reliability, and security requirements. All Redpanda Cloud clusters are deployed with an integrated glossterm:Redpanda Console[].

TIP: For more detailed information about the Redpanda platform, see xref:get-started:intro-to-events.adoc[] and xref:get-started:architecture.adoc[].

== Cluster types

Redpanda offers three types of fully-managed cloud clusters:

* <<Serverless>>: Clusters hosted in Redpanda Cloud. This is the fastest and easiest way to start data streaming. 
* <<Dedicated Cloud>>: Single-tenant clusters hosted in Redpanda Cloud. This provides more control over your deployment. 
* <<Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC)>>: Clusters hosted in your private cloud. This provides more control over your deployment and offers full data sovereignty. 
+
NOTE: With standard BYOC clusters, Redpanda manages security policies and resources for your VPC, including service accounts, subnetworks, IAM roles, firewall rules, and storage buckets. For the most security, you can manage these resources yourself with a xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc[customer-managed VPC].

=== Serverless

With Serverless clusters, you host your data in Redpanda's VPC, and Redpanda handles automatic scaling, provisioning, operations, and maintenance. This is a production-ready deployment option with a cluster available instantly. There is no base cost, and with pay-as-you-go billing after the free trial, you only pay for what you consume. You can view detailed billing activity for each cluster and edit payment methods on the *Billing* page. 

==== Sign up for Serverless

To start using Serverless, https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda/cloud-trial#serverless[sign up for a free trial^]. New trials receive $100 (USD) in free credits to spend in the first 14 days. This should be enough to run Redpanda with reasonable throughput. No credit card is required for a trial. To continue using your Serverless cluster after the free trial, add a credit card and pay as you go. 

NOTE: Serverless is currently in a limited availability (LA) release with xref:get-started:cluster-types/serverless.adoc#limits[usage limits]. During LA, existing clusters can scale to the usage limits, but new clusters may need to wait for availability.

=== Dedicated Cloud

With Dedicated clusters, you host your data on Redpanda cloud resources (AWS, GCP, or Azure), and Redpanda handles provisioning, operations, and maintenance. Dedicated clusters are single-tenant deployments that support private networking (for example, VPC peering to talk over private IPs) for better data isolation.
When you create a Dedicated cluster, you select the supported xref:reference:tiers/dedicated-tiers.adoc[tier] that meets your compute and storage needs. 

==== Sign up for Dedicated

To start using Dedicated, sign up for a free trial on the AWS Marketplace. New trials receive $300 (USD) in free credits to spend in the first 30 days. AWS Marketplace charges for anything beyond $300 unless you cancel the subscription. After 30 days, you can continue using your Dedicated cluster without any commitment, only paying for what you consume.

You can also contact https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda?section=enterprise-trial[Redpanda sales^] to request a private offer for monthly or annual committed use. With a usage-based billing commitment, you sign up for a monthly or an annual minimum spend amount. You can then use xref:billing:gcp-commit.adoc[Google Cloud Marketplace] or xref:billing:aws-commit.adoc[AWS Marketplace] to quickly provision Dedicated Cloud clusters, and you can view invoices and manage your subscription in the marketplace.

=== Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC)

With BYOC clusters, you deploy Redpanda in your own cloud (AWS, GCP, or Azure), and all data is
contained in your own environment. This provides an additional layer of security and isolation. When you create a BYOC cluster, you select the supported xref:reference:tiers/byoc-tiers.adoc[tier] that meets your compute and storage needs. Redpanda handles provisioning, operations, and maintenance. See also: <<BYOC architecture>>.

==== Sign up for BYOC

To start using BYOC, contact https://redpanda.com/try-redpanda?section=enterprise-trial[Redpanda sales^] to request a private offer. You are billed directly or through Google Cloud Marketplace or AWS Marketplace. 

== Serverless vs Dedicated/BYOC

Serverless clusters are a good fit for the following:

* Starter and growing workloads
* Spiky workloads (that is, development environments, systems that only occasionally get busy, or workloads that come and go)
* Fast and dynamic cluster creation: you can use a Serverless cluster as an isolated container for topics

With Serverless (or if you sign up for Dedicated through the AWS Marketplace), you only pay for what you consume, without any commitment. A cluster is created instantly, so you can surface it in your applications (for example, for tenant isolation). If your workload increases, you can migrate it to a Dedicated or BYOC cluster.

Dedicated and BYOC clusters offer the following features:

* Single-zone or multi-zone availability (a multi-zone cluster provides higher resiliency in the event of a failure in one of the zones)
* Private networking using VPC peering or a private connectivity service, such as AWS PrivateLink, GCP Private Service Connect, or Azure Private Link. 
* Ability to export metrics to a 3rd-party monitoring system
* Managed connectors
* Higher limits and quotas (see xref:get-started:cluster-types/serverless.adoc#limits[Serverless limits])

Consider Dedicated or BYOC if you need any of the following:

* Control over the deployment
* Private networking
* Workloads with consistently-high throughput

== Shared responsibility model

The Redpanda Cloud shared responsibility model lists the security ownership areas for Redpanda and customers. Responsibilities depend on the type of deployment. 

[tabs]
=====
Dedicated::
+
--
|===
| Resource | Redpanda responsibility | Customer responsibility

| Redpanda upgrades and hotfixes | &#10003; |  
| Cost management and attribution | &#10003; |   
| Software vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |    
| Infrastructure vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |   
| IAM (roles, service accounts, access segmentation) | &#10003; |  
| Compute | &#10003; |   
| VPC (subnets, routing, firewall) | &#10003; |   
| VPC peering | &#10003; |  
| VPC private links (service endpoint) | &#10003; |    
| VPC private links (consumer endpoint) |  | &#10003; 
| Local storage | &#10003; |   
| Tiered Storage | &#10003; |  
| Control plane | &#10003; |  
| Access controls and audit | &#10003; |  
| Managed disaster recovery |  | &#10003; 
| Observability and monitoring (SLOs, SLIs, tracing, alerting, runbooks) | &#10003; |   
| Availability SLA | &#10003; |  
| Proactive threat detection | &#10003; |  
| Static secret rotation | &#10003; |  
| Incident response | &#10003; |   
| Resilience verification  | &#10003; |
| Kafka Connect infrastructure  | &#10003; |
| Kafka Connect tasks state  |  | &#10003;
|===

--
BYOC::
+
--
|===
| Resource | Redpanda responsibility | Customer responsibility

| Redpanda upgrades and hotfixes | &#10003; |   
| Cost management and attribution | &#10003; | &#10003; 
| Software vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |  
| Infrastructure vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |   
| IAM (roles, service accounts, access segmentation) | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Compute | &#10003; |    
| VPC (subnets, routing, firewall) | &#10003; | &#10003; 
| VPC peering |  | &#10003;  
| VPC private links (service endpoint) | &#10003; |  
| VPC private links (consumer endpoint) |  | &#10003;  
| Local storage | &#10003; |  
| Tiered Storage | &#10003; |  
| Control plane | &#10003; |     
| Access controls and audit | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Managed disaster recovery |  | &#10003; 
| Observability and monitoring (SLOs, SLIs, tracing, alerting, runbooks) | &#10003; |    
| Availability SLA | &#10003; (subject to required access to customer resources) |  
| Proactive threat detection | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Static secret rotation | &#10003; |  
| Incident response | &#10003; |     
| Resilience verification  | &#10003; |
| Kafka Connect infrastructure | &#10003; | &#10003;
| Kafka Connect tasks state  |  | &#10003; |
|===

--
BYOC with customer-managed VPC::
+
--
|===
| Resource | Redpanda responsibility | Customer responsibility

| Redpanda upgrades and hotfixes | &#10003; |   
| Cost management and attribution | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Software vulnerability remediation | &#10003; |   
| Infrastructure vulnerability remediation | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| IAM (roles, service accounts, access segmentation) |  | &#10003;  
| Compute | &#10003; |   
| VPC (subnets, routing, firewall) |  | &#10003;  
| VPC peering |  | &#10003;  
| VPC private links (service endpoint) | &#10003; |   
| VPC private links (consumer endpoint) |  | &#10003;  
| Local storage | &#10003; |   
| Tiered Storage |  | &#10003;  
| Control plane | &#10003; |   
| Access controls and audit | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Managed disaster recovery |  |  &#10003; 
| Observability and monitoring (SLOs, SLIs, tracing, alerting, runbooks) | &#10003; | &#10003; (for VPC components and cloud storage buckets/containers managed by customer) 
| Availability SLA | &#10003; (subject to required access to customer resources) | &#10003;  
| Proactive threat detection | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Static secret rotation | &#10003; | &#10003;  
| Incident response | &#10003; |   
| Resilience verification | &#10003; |
| Kafka Connect infrastructure | &#10003; | &#10003;
| Kafka Connect tasks state  |  | &#10003; |
|===

--
=====

== Maintenance windows

By default, Redpanda Cloud upgrades take place on Tuesdays. Optionally, on the **Cluster settings** page, you can select a window of specific off-hours for your business for Redpanda to apply updates. All times are in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). Updates may start at any time during that window. 

== Redpanda Cloud architecture

When you sign up for a Redpanda account, Redpanda creates an organization for you. Your organization contains all your Redpanda resources, including your clusters and networks. Within your organization, Redpanda creates a default resource group to contain your resources. You can rename this resource group, and you can create more resource groups. For example, you may want different resource groups for production and testing. 

For high availability, Redpanda Cloud uses a control plane and data plane architecture. 

* *Control plane*: This is where most cluster management, operations, and maintenance takes place. The control plane enforces rules in the data plane.

* *Data plane*: This is where your cluster lives. The term _data plane_ is used interchangeably with _cluster_. 

* *Agent*: Redpanda uses an agent to manage the data plane from the control plane.

Clusters are configured and maintained in the control plane, but they remain available even if the network connection to the control plane is lost.

NOTE: In the user interface, when you're at the organization (org) level or the resource group level, but you haven't yet selected a cluster, you're in the control plane. This is where you can select, create, and delete clusters, resource groups, and networks. When you're at the cluster level working with topics, consumer groups, and connectors, you're in the data plane.

=== BYOC architecture

The following diagram shows a BYOC architecture, where you deploy the data plane in your own VPC. All network connections into the data plane take place through
either a public endpoint or a VPC peering network connection. Sensitive data and credentials never leave the data plane. 

image::shared:d_c_plane.png[Data plane and control plane]

A BYOC cluster is initially set up from the control plane. This is a two-step process performed by `rpk cloud byoc apply`:

. You bootstrap a virtual machine (VM) in your VPC. 
+
This VM spins up the agent and the required infrastructure. Redpanda assigns the necessary IAM policies required to run the agent and configures workload identity. That is, it configures independent IAM roles for each workload, with only the permissions each workload requires. 

. The agent communicates with the control plane to pull the cluster specifications. 
+
After the agent is up and running, it connects to the control plane and starts dequeuing and applying cluster specifications that provision, configure, and maintain clusters. The agent is in constant communication with the control plane,
receiving and applying cluster specifications and exchanging cluster metadata. Agents are authenticated and authorized through opaque and ephemeral tokens, and
they have dedicated job queues in the control plane. 
+
Agents also manage VPC peering networks. One agent manages each network resource at a time.
+
image::shared:byoc_apply.png[cloud_byoc_apply]

NOTE: To create a Redpanda cluster in your virtual private cloud (VPC), follow the instructions in the Redpanda Cloud UI. The UI contains the parameters necessary to successfully run `rpk cloud byoc apply` with your cloud provider. 

== Redpanda Cloud vs Self-Managed feature compatibility

Redpanda Cloud deployments do not support the following functionality available in Redpanda Self-Managed deployments:

- FIPS-compliance mode
- Data transforms (currently in beta for Redpanda Cloud)
- Remote Read Replicas (currently in beta for Redpanda Cloud)
- Kafka API OIDC authentication (however, Redpanda Cloud does support xref:security:cloud-authentication.adoc#single-sign-on[user authentication to an organization with SSO])
- Kerberos authentication
- Redpanda Console topic documentation
- Setting `auto_create_topics_enabled=true`
- Admin API
- The following `rpk` commands:

** `rpk connect` commands
** `rpk redpanda` commands
** `rpk cluster config`
** `rpk cluster health`
** `rpk cluster license`
** `rpk cluster maintenance`
** `rpk cluster partitions`
** `rpk cluster self-test`
** `rpk cluster storage`
** `rpk generate app` (supported in Serverless clusters)
** `rpk security user` (supported in Serverless clusters)
** `rpk topic describe-storage` (all other `rpk topic` commands are supported on both Redpanda Cloud and self-hosted)
** `rpk transform` commands (currently in beta for Redpanda Cloud)

NOTE: The `rpk cloud` commands are not supported in self-hosted deployments.

== Next steps
* xref:get-started:cluster-types/serverless.adoc[Create a Serverless Cluster]
* xref:get-started:cluster-types/dedicated/create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws.adoc[Create a Dedicated Cloud Cluster]
* xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/index.adoc[Create a BYOC Cluster]

include::shared:partial$suggested-reading.adoc[]

* https://redpanda.com/blog/deploy-redpanda-clusters-cloud-aws-gcp[Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC): best of both worlds^]

* https://redpanda.com/blog/data-sovereignty-fully-managed-cloud-byoc[A middle path for data sovereignty: Bring Your Own Cloud^]

include::shared:partial$suggested-video.adoc[]

* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gVlzsJAYT64&ab_channel=RedpandaData[YouTube - What is Redpanda BYOC? (3 mins)^]
