modules/get-started/pages/create-topic.adoc, before:

= Create a Topic
:description: Learn how to create a topic for a Redpanda Cloud cluster.
:page-aliases: cloud:create-topic.adoc



After creating a cluster, you can create a topic for that cluster. Topic properties are populated from information stored in the broker. For Dedicated and BYOC clusters, you can optionally overwrite the default settings. 

[cols="2,2a"]
|===
| Property | Description

| *Partitions*
| The number of partitions for the topic.

| *Replication factor*
| The number of partition replicas for the topic. Redpanda Cloud requires a minimum of 3 topic replicas. All topics are set to a replication factor 3 at topic creation. 

| *Cleanup policy*
| The policy that determines how to clean up old log segments. The default is *delete*.

| *Retention time*
| The maximum length of time to keep messages in a topic. The default is *7 days*.

| *Retention size*
| The maximum size of each partition. If a partition reaches this size and more messages are added, the oldest messages are deleted. The default is *infinite*.
|===

Commit message:

Rephrase, from Matt's review
If a topic is created with a replication factor of 1, Redpanda resets the replication factor to 3.

modules/get-started/pages/create-topic.adoc, after:

= Create a Topic
:description: Learn how to create a topic for a Redpanda Cloud cluster.
:page-aliases: cloud:create-topic.adoc



After creating a cluster, you can create a topic for that cluster. Topic properties are populated from information stored in the broker. For Dedicated and BYOC clusters, you can optionally overwrite the default settings. 

[cols="2,2a"]
|===
| Property | Description

| *Partitions*
| The number of partitions for the topic.

| *Replication factor*
| The number of partition replicas for the topic. Redpanda Cloud requires a minimum of 3 topic replicas. If a topic is created with a replication factor of 1, Redpanda resets the replication factor to 3. 

| *Cleanup policy*
| The policy that determines how to clean up old log segments. The default is *delete*.

| *Retention time*
| The maximum length of time to keep messages in a topic. The default is *7 days*.

| *Retention size*
| The maximum size of each partition. If a partition reaches this size and more messages are added, the oldest messages are deleted. The default is *infinite*.
|===
