modules/ai-agents/pages/mcp/local/quickstart.adoc, before:

= Local MCP server for Redpanda Cloud Quickstart
:page-beta: true
:description: Connect your Claude AI assistant to your Redpanda Cloud account and clusters using the local MCP server for Redpanda Cloud.

In this quickstart, you'll get your Claude AI assistant talking to Redpanda Cloud using the xref:ai-agents:mcp/local/overview.adoc[local MCP server for Redpanda Cloud].

If you're trying to deploy your own MCP server as a managed service inside your cluster, see xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/quickstart.adoc[].

== Prerequisites

* At least version 25.2.3 of xref:manage:rpk/rpk-install.adoc[`rpk` installed on your computer].
* Access to a Redpanda Cloud account.
* link:https://support.anthropic.com/en/articles/10065433-installing-claude-desktop[Claude] or link:https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/setup[Claude Code] installed.
+
TIP: For other clients, see xref:ai-agents:mcp/local/configuration.adoc[].

== Set up the MCP server

. Verify your `rpk` version
+
```bash
rpk version
```
+
Ensure the version is at least 25.2.3.

. Log in to Redpanda Cloud
+
```bash
rpk cloud login
```
+
A browser window opens. Sign in to grant access. After you sign in, `rpk` stores a token locally. This token is not shared with your AI assistant. It is used by the MCP server to authenticate requests to your Redpanda Cloud account.

. Install the MCP integration. Choose one client:
+
```bash
# Claude desktop
rpk cloud mcp install --client claude

# Claude Code (IDE)
rpk cloud mcp install --client claude-code
```
+
This command configures the MCP server for your client. If you need to update the integration, re-run the install command for your client.

== Start prompting

Launch Claude or Claude Code and try one of these prompts:

* “Create a Redpanda Cloud cluster named `dev-mcp`.”
* “List topics in `dev-mcp`.”
* “Create a topic `orders-raw` with 6 partitions.”

:note-caption: Delete operations are opt-in

NOTE: The MCP server does *not* expose API endpoints that result in delete operations by default. Use `--allow-delete` only if you intentionally want to enable delete operations. See xref:ai-agents:mcp/local/configuration.adoc#enable_delete_operations[Enable delete operations].

:note-caption: Note

== Next steps

* xref:ai-agents:mcp/local/configuration.adoc[]

Commit message:

Restructure MCP server documentation for better navigation
- Add new pages: best-practices, concepts, reference, tool-patterns, troubleshooting
- Remove deprecated pages: developer-guide, pipeline-patterns
- Improve MCP overview with deployment comparison table
- Update quickstart and admin-guide for clarity
- Align structure with rp-connect-docs for single-sourcing

modules/ai-agents/pages/mcp/local/quickstart.adoc, after:

= Local MCP server for Redpanda Cloud Quickstart
:page-beta: true
:description: Connect your Claude AI assistant to your Redpanda Cloud account and clusters using the local MCP server for Redpanda Cloud.
:page-topic-type: tutorial
:personas: ai_agent_developer, redpanda_cloud_user, platform_engineer_sre
// Reader journey: "I'm new" → first hands-on experience
// Learning objectives - what readers will achieve by completing this quickstart:
:learning-objective-1: Authenticate to Redpanda Cloud with rpk
:learning-objective-2: Install the MCP integration for Claude
:learning-objective-3: Issue natural language commands to manage clusters

In this quickstart, you'll get your Claude AI assistant talking to Redpanda Cloud using the xref:ai-agents:mcp/local/overview.adoc[local MCP server for Redpanda Cloud].

If you're trying to deploy your own MCP server as a managed service inside your cluster, see xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/quickstart.adoc[].

== Prerequisites

* At least version 25.2.3 of xref:manage:rpk/rpk-install.adoc[`rpk` installed on your computer].
* Access to a Redpanda Cloud account.
* link:https://support.anthropic.com/en/articles/10065433-installing-claude-desktop[Claude] or link:https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/setup[Claude Code] installed.
+
TIP: For other clients, see xref:ai-agents:mcp/local/configuration.adoc[].

== Set up the MCP server

. Verify your `rpk` version
+
```bash
rpk version
```
+
Ensure the version is at least 25.2.3.

. Log in to Redpanda Cloud
+
```bash
rpk cloud login
```
+
A browser window opens. Sign in to grant access. After you sign in, `rpk` stores a token locally. This token is not shared with your AI assistant. It is used by the MCP server to authenticate requests to your Redpanda Cloud account.

. Install the MCP integration. Choose one client:
+
```bash
# Claude desktop
rpk cloud mcp install --client claude

# Claude Code (IDE)
rpk cloud mcp install --client claude-code
```
+
This command configures the MCP server for your client. If you need to update the integration, re-run the install command for your client.

== Start prompting

Launch Claude or Claude Code and try one of these prompts:

* “Create a Redpanda Cloud cluster named `dev-mcp`.”
* “List topics in `dev-mcp`.”
* “Create a topic `orders-raw` with 6 partitions.”

:note-caption: Delete operations are opt-in

NOTE: The MCP server does *not* expose API endpoints that result in delete operations by default. Use `--allow-delete` only if you intentionally want to enable delete operations. See xref:ai-agents:mcp/local/configuration.adoc#enable_delete_operations[Enable delete operations].

:note-caption: Note

== Next steps

Continue your learning journey with this resource:

* xref:ai-agents:mcp/local/configuration.adoc[]: Configure the local MCP server for advanced use cases
