modules/develop/pages/managed-connectors/converters-and-serialization.adoc, before:

= Converters and Serialization
:description: Use converters to handle the serialization and deserialization of data between a Redpanda topic and a managed connector.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/managed-connectors/converters-and-serialization.adoc

include::shared:partial$kafka-connect.adoc[]

Connectors are a translation layer working between Redpanda and the remote system. 

For *sink* connectors the translation happens in the following phases:

. Converter deserializes data from Redpanda message format (for example JSON or Avro) to a universal in-memory connect data format.
. The in-memory connect data structure is translated by the connector to the data model of the remote system.

For *source* connectors it is vice versa, the phases are:

. Connector translates the data model from remote system format to the in-memory connect data structure.
. Converter serializes the data from a universal in-memory connect format to a Redpanda message.

Each Redpanda message is a key and value record. Record key and value converters are configured separately with the `Redpanda message key format` and `Redpanda message value format` properties. Key and value converters can be different.

[NOTE]
====
If an external system requires structured data (like BigQuery or a SQL database), then you must provide data with a schema. Use the Avro, Protobuf, or JSON converter with a schema.
====

== ByteArray converter

The ByteArray converter is the most primitive and high-throughput converter. Schema is ignored.
This is the default converter type for managed connectors. 

To use the converter, select the `ByteArray` option as a key or value message format.

== String converter

The String converter is a high-throughput converter. Schema is ignored. All data is converted to a string.

To use the converter, select the `String` option as a key or value message format.

== JSON converter

The JSON converter supports a JSON schema embedded in the message, where each message contains a schema. It results in a bigger message size. The connector needs a message schema to check message format.

To use the converter, select the `JSON` option as a key or value message format.

Example JSON message with embedded schema:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": {
    "type": "struct",
    "fields": [
      {
        "type": "int64",
        "optional": false,
        "field": "person_id"
      },
      {
        "type": "string",
        "optional": false,
        "field": "name"
      }
    ]
  },
  "payload": {
    "person_id": 1,
    "name": "Redpanda"
  }
}
----

If you consume JSON data with no message schema, the schema check for the connector must be disabled with the `Message key JSON contains schema` or `Message value JSON contains schema` option.

== Avro converter

The Avro converter requires a schema in Schema Registry.

Avro supports primitive types and complex types, like records, enums, arrays, maps, and unions.

To specify a timestamp in an Avro schema for use with Kafka Connect, use:

[source,json]
----
{
    "name": "time1",
    "type": [
        "null",
        {
            "type": "long",
            "connect.version": 1,
            "connect.name": "org.apache.kafka.connect.data.Timestamp",
            "logicalType": "timestamp-millis"
        }
    ],
    "default": null
}
----

See also: 

- xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Redpanda Schema Registry]
- https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.11.1/specification[Avro specification^]

== CloudEvents converter

The CloudEvents converter is specific to Debezium PostgreSQL and MySQL source connectors.

See also: https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/2.2/integrations/cloudevents.html[CloudEvents Converter documentation^]

== Protobuf converter {badge-cloud-beta}

The Protobuf converter requires a schema in Schema Registry.
The converter only supports sink connectors. Source connectors are not supported.

To use the converter, select the `Protobuf` option as a key or value message format.

See also: xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Redpanda Schema Registry]

== Set property keys

Redpanda Connectors use a set of `<property.key>=<value>` to set up its properties. 

For example if you want to set the property `topic.creation.enable` to `true`, use `topic.creation.enable=true` in the property settings page.

Commit message:

DOC-1565 Disable KC with Cloud API

modules/develop/pages/managed-connectors/converters-and-serialization.adoc, after:

= Converters and Serialization
:description: Use converters to handle the serialization and deserialization of data between a Redpanda topic and an external system with Kafka Connect.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/managed-connectors/converters-and-serialization.adoc

include::shared:partial$kafka-connect.adoc[]

Connectors are a translation layer working between Redpanda and the remote system. 

For *sink* connectors the translation happens in the following phases:

. Converter deserializes data from Redpanda message format (for example JSON or Avro) to a universal in-memory connect data format.
. The in-memory connect data structure is translated by the connector to the data model of the remote system.

For *source* connectors it is vice versa, the phases are:

. Connector translates the data model from remote system format to the in-memory connect data structure.
. Converter serializes the data from a universal in-memory connect format to a Redpanda message.

Each Redpanda message is a key and value record. Record key and value converters are configured separately with the `Redpanda message key format` and `Redpanda message value format` properties. Key and value converters can be different.

[NOTE]
====
If an external system requires structured data (like BigQuery or a SQL database), then you must provide data with a schema. Use the Avro, Protobuf, or JSON converter with a schema.
====

== ByteArray converter

The ByteArray converter is the most primitive and high-throughput converter. Schema is ignored.
This is the default converter type for managed connectors. 

To use the converter, select the `ByteArray` option as a key or value message format.

== String converter

The String converter is a high-throughput converter. Schema is ignored. All data is converted to a string.

To use the converter, select the `String` option as a key or value message format.

== JSON converter

The JSON converter supports a JSON schema embedded in the message, where each message contains a schema. It results in a bigger message size. The connector needs a message schema to check message format.

To use the converter, select the `JSON` option as a key or value message format.

Example JSON message with embedded schema:

[source,json]
----
{
  "schema": {
    "type": "struct",
    "fields": [
      {
        "type": "int64",
        "optional": false,
        "field": "person_id"
      },
      {
        "type": "string",
        "optional": false,
        "field": "name"
      }
    ]
  },
  "payload": {
    "person_id": 1,
    "name": "Redpanda"
  }
}
----

If you consume JSON data with no message schema, the schema check for the connector must be disabled with the `Message key JSON contains schema` or `Message value JSON contains schema` option.

== Avro converter

The Avro converter requires a schema in Schema Registry.

Avro supports primitive types and complex types, like records, enums, arrays, maps, and unions.

To specify a timestamp in an Avro schema for use with Kafka Connect, use:

[source,json]
----
{
    "name": "time1",
    "type": [
        "null",
        {
            "type": "long",
            "connect.version": 1,
            "connect.name": "org.apache.kafka.connect.data.Timestamp",
            "logicalType": "timestamp-millis"
        }
    ],
    "default": null
}
----

See also: 

- xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Redpanda Schema Registry]
- https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.11.1/specification[Avro specification^]

== CloudEvents converter

The CloudEvents converter is specific to Debezium PostgreSQL and MySQL source connectors.

See also: https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/2.2/integrations/cloudevents.html[CloudEvents Converter documentation^]

== Protobuf converter {badge-cloud-beta}

The Protobuf converter requires a schema in Schema Registry.
The converter only supports sink connectors. Source connectors are not supported.

To use the converter, select the `Protobuf` option as a key or value message format.

See also: xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Redpanda Schema Registry]

== Set property keys

Redpanda Connectors use a set of `<property.key>=<value>` to set up its properties. 

For example if you want to set the property `topic.creation.enable` to `true`, use `topic.creation.enable=true` in the property settings page.
