modules/develop/pages/managed-connectors/disable-kc.adoc, before:

= Disable Kafka Connect
:description: Learn how to disable Kafka Connect using the Cloud API.

Kafka Connect is disabled by default on new clusters. If you previously enabled Kafka Connect on a cluster and want to disable it, you can use the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Cloud API]. 

NOTE: Redpanda Support does not manage or monitor Kafka Connect, but Support can enable the feature for your account.

== Verify Kafka Connect is enabled

If Kafka Connect is enabled on your cluster, you will see it configured on the *Connect* page in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

You can also verify with the Cloud API: 

[,bash]
----
curl -sX GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/{cluster.id}" \
 -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
 -H 'accept: application/json'  | jq -r '.cluster.kafka_connect' 
----  

Replace `{cluster.id}` with your actual cluster ID. You can find the cluster ID in the Redpanda Cloud UI. Look in the **Details** section of the cluster overview.

If Kafka Connect is enabled, the response will show:

[,bash]
----
  "enabled": true
----  

== Prerequisites

- You have the cluster ID of a cluster that has Kafka Connect enabled. 
- You have a valid bearer token for the Cloud API. For details, see xref:manage:api/cloud-api-authentication.adoc[Authenticate to the API]. 

IMPORTANT: Make sure to stop any active connectors gracefully before disabling Kafka Connect to avoid data loss or incomplete processing.

== Disable Kafka Connect

After you are authenticated to the Cloud API, make a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#patch-/v1/clusters/-cluster.id-[`PATCH /v1/clusters/{cluster.id}`] request, replacing `{cluster.id}` with your actual cluster ID.

[,bash]
----
curl -X PATCH "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/{cluster.id}" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"kafka_connect":{"enabled":false}}'
----

The `PATCH` request returns the ID of a long-running operation. You can check the status of the operation by polling the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/operations/-id-[`GET /operations/{id}`] endpoint:

[,bash]
----
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/operations/{operation.id}" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----

When the operation is complete, the status will show `"state": "STATE_COMPLETED"`. You can verify that Kafka Connect has been disabled by running the verification command from the previous section. The response should show:

[,bash]
----
  "enabled": false
----

Commit message:

Bump xref cleanup (#389)
* Continue URL migration batch - update cloud-api references, fix deprecation policy header

* remaining updates

* These topics are migrated to Bump

* Missed edits

* Missed edits

modules/develop/pages/managed-connectors/disable-kc.adoc, after:

= Disable Kafka Connect
:description: Learn how to disable Kafka Connect using the Cloud API.

Kafka Connect is disabled by default on new clusters. If you previously enabled Kafka Connect on a cluster and want to disable it, you can use the link:/api/doc/cloud-controlplane/topic/topic-cloud-api-overview[Cloud API]. 

NOTE: Redpanda Support does not manage or monitor Kafka Connect, but Support can enable the feature for your account.

== Verify Kafka Connect is enabled

If Kafka Connect is enabled on your cluster, you will see it configured on the *Connect* page in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

You can also verify with the Cloud API: 

[,bash]
----
curl -sX GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/{cluster.id}" \
 -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
 -H 'accept: application/json'  | jq -r '.cluster.kafka_connect' 
----  

Replace `{cluster.id}` with your actual cluster ID. You can find the cluster ID in the Redpanda Cloud UI. Look in the **Details** section of the cluster overview.

If Kafka Connect is enabled, the response will show:

[,bash]
----
  "enabled": true
----  

== Prerequisites

- You have the cluster ID of a cluster that has Kafka Connect enabled. 
- You have a valid bearer token for the Cloud API. For details, see link:/api/doc/cloud-controlplane/authentication[Authenticate to the API]. 

IMPORTANT: Make sure to stop any active connectors gracefully before disabling Kafka Connect to avoid data loss or incomplete processing.

== Disable Kafka Connect

After you are authenticated to the Cloud API, make a link:/api/doc/cloud-controlplane/operation/operation-clusterservice_updatecluster[`PATCH /v1/clusters/{cluster.id}`] request, replacing `{cluster.id}` with your actual cluster ID.

[,bash]
----
curl -X PATCH "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/{cluster.id}" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"kafka_connect":{"enabled":false}}'
----

The `PATCH` request returns the ID of a long-running operation. You can check the status of the operation by polling the link:/api/doc/cloud-controlplane/operation/operation-operationservice_getoperation[`GET /operations/{id}`] endpoint:

[,bash]
----
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/operations/{operation.id}" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----

When the operation is complete, the status will show `"state": "STATE_COMPLETED"`. You can verify that Kafka Connect has been disabled by running the verification command from the previous section. The response should show:

[,bash]
----
  "enabled": false
----
