modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/byoc/aws/vpc-byo-aws.adoc, before:

= Create a BYOVPC Cluster on AWS
:description: Connect Redpanda Cloud to your existing VPC for additional security.
:page-aliases: get-started:cluster-types/byoc/vpc-byo-aws.adoc
:page-cloud: true
:page-beta: true

include::shared:partial$feature-flag.adoc[]

With a standard BYOC cluster, Redpanda manages the VPC lifecycle. For additional security, you can deploy the Redpanda glossterm:data plane[] into your existing shared VPC and manage the VPC lifecycle yourself. 

When you create a BYOCVPC cluster, you specify your VPC and service account. The Redpanda Cloud agent doesn't create any new resources or alter any settings in your account. With BYOVPC: 

* You provide your own VPC in your AWS account.
* You maintain more control over your account, because Redpanda requires fewer permissions than standard BYOC clusters.
* You control your security resources and policies, including subnets, service accounts, IAM roles, firewall rules, and storage buckets.

The https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/tree/main/customer-managed/aws[Redpanda repository^] contains the code that deploys the resources you must create for a BYOVPC cluster. You create these resources in advance and provide them to Redpanda during cluster creation. The code is provided in https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform[Terraform^]. There may be resources in the repository that already exist in your environment that you don't want to create (for example, the VPC). Variables are provided for this purpose.

== Prerequisites

* Access to an AWS project in which you create your cluster.
* Minimum permissions in that AWS project. For the actions required by the user who will create the cluster with `rpk cloud byoc aws apply`, see https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/blob/main/customer-managed/aws/terraform/iam_rpk_user.tf[`iam_rpk_user.tf`^].
* Familiarity with the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API]. For example, you should be familiar with how to use the Cloud API to authenticate and create a cluster.
* https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install[Terraform^] version 1.8.5 or later.

== Limitations

* Existing clusters cannot be moved to a BYOVPC cluster.
* After creating a BYOVPC cluster, you cannot change to a different VPC.

== Set environment variables

The following example creates variables for the AWS account ID, region, VPC name, and a prefix for resources. It then creates a new VPC in AWS with a CIDR block (10.0.0.0/16) and captures the VPC ID.

```bash
export AWS_ACCOUNT_ID=
export AWS_REGION=us-east-2
export AWS_VPC_NAME=sample-redpanda-vpc
export REDPANDA_COMMON_PREFIX=sample-

export AWS_VPC_ID=$(aws ec2 create-vpc --cidr-block 10.0.0.0/16 --query Vpc.VpcId --region ${AWS_REGION} --tag-specification ResourceType=vpc,Tags='[{Key=Name,Value="${AWS_VPC_NAME}"}]' --output text --profile AWSAdministratorAccess-605419575229)
```

The https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/blob/main/customer-managed/aws/terraform/variables.tf[`variables.tf`] file contains a number of variables that allow you to modify the Terraform code to meet your specific needs. In some cases, it lets you skip creation of certain resources (for example, the VPC) or modify the configuration of a resource.

== Configure Terraform

NOTE: You may want to configure https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/state/remote[remote state^] for this Terraform. For simplicity, these instructions assume local state.

Define a JSON file called `byovnet.auto.tfvars.json` inside the Terraform directory that contains information about the VPC. Optionally, you can enable PrivateLink. For example: 

```json
cat > byoc.auto.tfvars.json <<EOF
{
  "aws_account_id": "${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}",
  "region": "${AWS_REGION}",
  "common_prefix": "${REDPANDA_COMMON_PREFIX}",
  "condition_tags": {
  },
  "default_tags": {
  },
  "ignore_tags": [
  ],
  "vpc_id": "${AWS_VPC_ID}",
  "zones": [],
  "enable_private_link": true,
  "create_rpk_user": true,
  "force_destroy_cloud_storage": true
}
EOF

```

== Deploy Terraform

Initialize, plan, and apply Terraform to set up the AWS infrastructure:

```
terraform init
terraform plan
terraform apply
```

Note the output values that the `terraform apply` command displays. You can also get these values by running `terraform output`. The ARN (Amazon Resource Name) output  values are necessary in later steps.

You can set additional environment variables that extract the output for AWS resources and set your Redpanda credentials. For example:

```bash
export REDPANDA_RG_ID=<Retrieve the ID from the URL of the resource group when accessing within Redpanda Cloud>
export AWS_MANAGEMENT_BUCKET="$(terraform output -raw management_bucket_arn)"
export AWS_DYNAMODB_TABLE="$(terraform output -raw dynamodb_table_arn)"
export AWS_PRIVATE_SUBNETS="$(terraform output -raw private_subnet_ids)"
export AWS_VPC="$(terraform output -raw vpc_arn)"

export REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID=
export REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET=
```

[TIP]
====

* To get the Redpanda authentication credentials and resource group, follow the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-quickstart.adoc[].
* For example Terraform code of the expected provisioned resources, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/tree/main/customer-managed/aws[BYOVPC on AWS README^].
====

== Authenticate with Redpanda Cloud

Get a Bearer token from Redpanda's authentication endpoint using the Redpanda credentials:

```bash
export BEARER_TOKEN=$(curl --request POST \
--url 'https://auth.prd.cloud.redpanda.com/oauth/token' \
--header 'content-type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
--data grant_type=client_credentials \
--data client_id=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID} \
--data client_secret=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET} \
--data audience=cloudv2-production.redpanda.cloud | jq -r '.access_token')
```

== Create network

To create the Redpanda network: 

. Define a JSON file called `redpanda-network.json` that includes the AWS VPC and region, as well as AWS-specific resources like S3, DynamoDB, and subnets. For example: 
+
```json
cat > redpanda-network.json <<EOF
{
    "name":"sample-redpanda-network",
    "resource_group_id": ${REDPANDA_RG_ID},
    "cloud_provider":"CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
    "region": ${AWS_REGION},
    "cluster_type":"TYPE_BYOC",
    "customer_managed_resources": {
      "aws": {
        "management_bucket": {
          "arn": ${AWS_MANAGEMENT_BUCKET}
        },
        "dynamodb_table": {
          "arn": ${AWS_DYNAMODB_TABLE}
        },
        "private_subnets": {
          "arns": ${AWS_PRIVATE_SUBNETS}
        },
        "vpc": {
          "arn": ${AWS_VPC}
        }
      }
   }
} 
EOF
```

. Use the Cloud API to create the network and retrieve the network ID: 
+
```bash
export REDPANDA_NETWORK_ID=$(curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/networks" \
 -H "accept: application/json" \
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" \
 --data-binary @redpanda-network.json | jq -r '.operation.id')
```
+
The Create Network request returns a `resource_id`. For example:
+
[,yaml,lines=11]
----
{
   "operation":{
      "id":"cpas8k6r4up5li18auh0",
      "metadata":{
         "@type":"type.googleapis.com/redpanda.api.controlplane.v1beta2.CreateNetworkMetadata",
         "network_id":"cpb338gekjj5i1cpj3t0"
      },
      "state":"STATE_IN_PROGRESS",
      "started_at":"2024-05-28T19:33:54.631Z",
      "type":"TYPE_CREATE_NETWORK",
      "resource_id":"cpb338gekjj5i1cpj3t0"
   }
}
----

== Create cluster

To create the Redpanda cluster: 

. Create environment variables for cluster information, like the version, tier, and availability zones. 
+
```bash
export AWS_ZONES='["use-az1", "use-az2", "use-az3"]'
export REDPANDA_CLUSTER_NAME=sample-redpanda-cluster
export REDPANDA_VERSION=24.3
export REDPANDA_THROUGHPUT_TIER=tier-1-aws-v3-arm
```

. Define a JSON file called `redpanda-cluster.json` that includes cluster information: 
+
```json
cat > redpanda-cluster.json <<EOF
{
  "cloud_provider":"CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
  "connection_type":"CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
  "name": "${REDPANDA_CLUSTER_NAME}",
  "resource_group_id": "${REDPANDA_RG_ID}",
  "network_id": "${REDPANDA_NETWORK_ID}",
  "region": "${AWS_REGION}",
  "throughput_tier": "${REDPANDA_THROUGHPUT_TIER}",
  "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
  "zones": ${AWS_ZONES},
  "redpanda_version": "${REDPANDA_VERSION}"
}
EOF
```

. Use the Cloud API to deploy the cluster and retrieve its ID:
+
```bash
export REDPANDA_ID=$(curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/clusters" \
 -H "accept: application/json" \
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" \
 --data-binary @redpanda-cluster.json | jq -r '.operation.resource_id')
```
+
The create cluster request returns a `resource_id`, which is required in the next step. For example:
+
[,yaml,lines=11]
```bash
{
   "operation":{
      "id":"cpas8k6r4up5li18auhg",
      "metadata":{
         "@type":"type.googleapis.com/redpanda.api.controlplane.v1beta2.CreateClusterMetadata",
         "cluster_id":"cpb33c8ekjj5i1cpj3v0"
      },
      "state":"STATE_IN_PROGRESS",
      "started_at":"2024-05-28T19:34:09.501Z",
      "type":"TYPE_CREATE_CLUSTER",
      "resource_id":"cpb33c8ekjj5i1cpj3v0"
   }
}
```

== Create cluster resources

To create the initial cluster resources, first log in to Redpanda Cloud with `rpk cloud login`, and then run `rpk cloud byoc aws apply`. This creates an autoscaling group, an agent VM, and the following resources:

* S3 objects
* Launch template
* Autoscaling group

NOTE: You must have the `iam_rpk_user.tf` permissions described in the prerequisites. 

```bash
rpk cloud login \
  --save \
  --client-id=${REDPANDCA_CLIENT_ID} \
  --client-secret=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET} \
  --no-profile

rpk cloud byoc aws apply \
  --redpanda-id=${REDPANDA_ID}
```

Output:

```bash
Checking RPK User... PASSED
Checking IAM Instance Profiles... PASSED
Checking Storage... PASSED
Checking Network... PASSED
Reconciling agent infrastructure...
Running apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-bootstrap"}
Finished apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-bootstrap"}
Running apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-network"}
Finished apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-network"}
Running apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-agent"}
Finished apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-agent"}
The Redpanda cluster is deploying. This can take up to 45 minutes. View status at https://cloud.redpanda.com/clusters/${REDPANDA_ID}/overview.
```

The agent VM now is running and handles the remaining provisioning steps. This can take up to 45 minutes. When provisioning completes, the cluster status updates to `Running`. If the cluster remains in `Creating` status after 45 minutes, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda support^].

=== Validation checks

The `rpk cloud byoc aws apply` command performs validation checks before proceeding with provisioning:

* RPK user: Checks if the user running the command has sufficient privileges to provision the agent. Any
missing permissions are displayed in the output.

* IAM instance profile: Checks that `connectors_node_group_instance_profile`, `redpanda_node_group_instance_profile`,
`utility_node_group_instance_profile`, and `k8s_cluster_role` have the minimum required permissions. Any missing permissions are displayed in the output.

* Storage: Checks that the `management_bucket` exists and is versioned, checks that the `cloud_storage_bucket` exists and is not versioned, and checks that the `dynamodb_table` exists.

* Network: Checks that the VPC exists, checks that the subnets exist and have the expected tags, and checks that the security groups exist and have the desired ingress and egress rules.

If you think validation errors are erroneous, you can rerun the command with the `--no-validate` tag
to skip validation.

== Check cluster status

Cluster creation is an example of an operation that can take a longer period of time to complete. You can check the operation state with the Cloud API or check the Redpanda Cloud UI for cluster status.

Example using the operation ID returned from your create cluster command:

```bash
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/operations/<operation_id from cluster creation>" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer $YOUR_TOKEN"
```

Example retrieving cluster:

```bash
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/clusters/${REDPANDA_ID}" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer $YOUR_TOKEN"
```

== Delete cluster

To delete the Redpanda cluster with the Cloud API, run:

----
export REDPANDA_ID=$(curl -X DELETE "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/clusters/${REDPANDA_ID}" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" | jq -r '.operation.resource_id')
----

After that completes, run: 

----
rpk cloud byoc aws destroy --redpanda-id ${REDPANDA_ID}
----

Commit message:

add link to API for regions & tiers

modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/byoc/aws/vpc-byo-aws.adoc, after:

= Create a BYOVPC Cluster on AWS
:description: Connect Redpanda Cloud to your existing VPC for additional security.
:page-aliases: get-started:cluster-types/byoc/vpc-byo-aws.adoc
:page-cloud: true
:page-beta: true

include::shared:partial$feature-flag.adoc[]

With a standard BYOC cluster, Redpanda manages the VPC lifecycle. For additional security, you can deploy the Redpanda glossterm:data plane[] into your existing shared VPC and manage the VPC lifecycle yourself. 

When you create a BYOCVPC cluster, you specify your VPC and service account. The Redpanda Cloud agent doesn't create any new resources or alter any settings in your account. With BYOVPC: 

* You provide your own VPC in your AWS account.
* You maintain more control over your account, because Redpanda requires fewer permissions than standard BYOC clusters.
* You control your security resources and policies, including subnets, service accounts, IAM roles, firewall rules, and storage buckets.

The https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/tree/main/customer-managed/aws[Redpanda repository^] contains the code that deploys the resources you must create for a BYOVPC cluster. You create these resources in advance and provide them to Redpanda during cluster creation. The code is provided in https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform[Terraform^]. There may be resources in the repository that already exist in your environment that you don't want to create (for example, the VPC). Variables are provided for this purpose.

== Prerequisites

* Access to an AWS project in which you create your cluster.
* Minimum permissions in that AWS project. For the actions required by the user who will create the cluster with `rpk cloud byoc aws apply`, see https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/blob/main/customer-managed/aws/terraform/iam_rpk_user.tf[`iam_rpk_user.tf`^].
* Familiarity with the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API]. For example, you should be familiar with how to use the Cloud API to authenticate and create a cluster.
* https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install[Terraform^] version 1.8.5 or later.

== Limitations

* Existing clusters cannot be moved to a BYOVPC cluster.
* After creating a BYOVPC cluster, you cannot change to a different VPC.

== Set environment variables

The following example creates variables for the AWS account ID, region, VPC name, and a prefix for resources. It then creates a new VPC in AWS with a CIDR block (10.0.0.0/16) and captures the VPC ID.

```bash
export AWS_ACCOUNT_ID=
export AWS_REGION=us-east-2
export AWS_VPC_NAME=sample-redpanda-vpc
export REDPANDA_COMMON_PREFIX=sample-

export AWS_VPC_ID=$(aws ec2 create-vpc --cidr-block 10.0.0.0/16 --query Vpc.VpcId --region ${AWS_REGION} --tag-specification ResourceType=vpc,Tags='[{Key=Name,Value="${AWS_VPC_NAME}"}]' --output text --profile AWSAdministratorAccess-605419575229)
```

The https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/blob/main/customer-managed/aws/terraform/variables.tf[`variables.tf`] file contains a number of variables that allow you to modify the Terraform code to meet your specific needs. In some cases, it lets you skip creation of certain resources (for example, the VPC) or modify the configuration of a resource.

== Configure Terraform

NOTE: You may want to configure https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/state/remote[remote state^] for this Terraform. For simplicity, these instructions assume local state.

Define a JSON file called `byovnet.auto.tfvars.json` inside the Terraform directory that contains information about the VPC. Optionally, you can enable PrivateLink. For example: 

```json
cat > byoc.auto.tfvars.json <<EOF
{
  "aws_account_id": "${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}",
  "region": "${AWS_REGION}",
  "common_prefix": "${REDPANDA_COMMON_PREFIX}",
  "condition_tags": {
  },
  "default_tags": {
  },
  "ignore_tags": [
  ],
  "vpc_id": "${AWS_VPC_ID}",
  "zones": [],
  "enable_private_link": true,
  "create_rpk_user": true,
  "force_destroy_cloud_storage": true
}
EOF

```

== Deploy Terraform

Initialize, plan, and apply Terraform to set up the AWS infrastructure:

```
terraform init
terraform plan
terraform apply
```

Note the output values that the `terraform apply` command displays. You can also get these values by running `terraform output`. The ARN (Amazon Resource Name) output  values are necessary in later steps.

You can set additional environment variables that extract the output for AWS resources and set your Redpanda credentials. For example:

```bash
export REDPANDA_RG_ID=<Retrieve the ID from the URL of the resource group when accessing within Redpanda Cloud>
export AWS_MANAGEMENT_BUCKET="$(terraform output -raw management_bucket_arn)"
export AWS_DYNAMODB_TABLE="$(terraform output -raw dynamodb_table_arn)"
export AWS_PRIVATE_SUBNETS="$(terraform output -raw private_subnet_ids)"
export AWS_VPC="$(terraform output -raw vpc_arn)"

export REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID=
export REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET=
```

[TIP]
====

* To get the Redpanda authentication credentials and resource group, follow the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-quickstart.adoc[].
* For example Terraform code of the expected provisioned resources, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/tree/main/customer-managed/aws[BYOVPC on AWS README^].
====

== Authenticate with Redpanda Cloud

Get a Bearer token from Redpanda's authentication endpoint using the Redpanda credentials:

```bash
export BEARER_TOKEN=$(curl --request POST \
--url 'https://auth.prd.cloud.redpanda.com/oauth/token' \
--header 'content-type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
--data grant_type=client_credentials \
--data client_id=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID} \
--data client_secret=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET} \
--data audience=cloudv2-production.redpanda.cloud | jq -r '.access_token')
```

== Create network

To create the Redpanda network: 

. Define a JSON file called `redpanda-network.json` that includes the AWS VPC and region, as well as AWS-specific resources like S3, DynamoDB, and subnets. For example: 
+
```json
cat > redpanda-network.json <<EOF
{
    "name":"sample-redpanda-network",
    "resource_group_id": ${REDPANDA_RG_ID},
    "cloud_provider":"CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
    "region": ${AWS_REGION},
    "cluster_type":"TYPE_BYOC",
    "customer_managed_resources": {
      "aws": {
        "management_bucket": {
          "arn": ${AWS_MANAGEMENT_BUCKET}
        },
        "dynamodb_table": {
          "arn": ${AWS_DYNAMODB_TABLE}
        },
        "private_subnets": {
          "arns": ${AWS_PRIVATE_SUBNETS}
        },
        "vpc": {
          "arn": ${AWS_VPC}
        }
      }
   }
} 
EOF
```

. Use the Cloud API to create the network and retrieve the network ID: 
+
```bash
export REDPANDA_NETWORK_ID=$(curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/networks" \
 -H "accept: application/json" \
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" \
 --data-binary @redpanda-network.json | jq -r '.operation.id')
```
+
The Create Network request returns a `resource_id`. For example:
+
[,yaml,lines=11]
----
{
   "operation":{
      "id":"cpas8k6r4up5li18auh0",
      "metadata":{
         "@type":"type.googleapis.com/redpanda.api.controlplane.v1beta2.CreateNetworkMetadata",
         "network_id":"cpb338gekjj5i1cpj3t0"
      },
      "state":"STATE_IN_PROGRESS",
      "started_at":"2024-05-28T19:33:54.631Z",
      "type":"TYPE_CREATE_NETWORK",
      "resource_id":"cpb338gekjj5i1cpj3t0"
   }
}
----

== Create cluster

To create the Redpanda cluster: 

. Create environment variables for cluster information, like the version, tier, and availability zones. 
+
```bash
export AWS_ZONES='["use-az1", "use-az2", "use-az3"]'
export REDPANDA_CLUSTER_NAME=sample-redpanda-cluster
export REDPANDA_VERSION=24.3
export REDPANDA_THROUGHPUT_TIER=tier-1-aws-v3-arm
```
+
TIP: See the full list of zones and tiers available with each provider in the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#api-description[API reference].

. Define a JSON file called `redpanda-cluster.json` that includes cluster information: 
+
```json
cat > redpanda-cluster.json <<EOF
{
  "cloud_provider":"CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
  "connection_type":"CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
  "name": "${REDPANDA_CLUSTER_NAME}",
  "resource_group_id": "${REDPANDA_RG_ID}",
  "network_id": "${REDPANDA_NETWORK_ID}",
  "region": "${AWS_REGION}",
  "throughput_tier": "${REDPANDA_THROUGHPUT_TIER}",
  "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
  "zones": ${AWS_ZONES},
  "redpanda_version": "${REDPANDA_VERSION}"
}
EOF
```

. Use the Cloud API to deploy the cluster and retrieve its ID:
+
```bash
export REDPANDA_ID=$(curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/clusters" \
 -H "accept: application/json" \
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" \
 --data-binary @redpanda-cluster.json | jq -r '.operation.resource_id')
```
+
The create cluster request returns a `resource_id`, which is required in the next step. For example:
+
[,yaml,lines=11]
```bash
{
   "operation":{
      "id":"cpas8k6r4up5li18auhg",
      "metadata":{
         "@type":"type.googleapis.com/redpanda.api.controlplane.v1beta2.CreateClusterMetadata",
         "cluster_id":"cpb33c8ekjj5i1cpj3v0"
      },
      "state":"STATE_IN_PROGRESS",
      "started_at":"2024-05-28T19:34:09.501Z",
      "type":"TYPE_CREATE_CLUSTER",
      "resource_id":"cpb33c8ekjj5i1cpj3v0"
   }
}
```

== Create cluster resources

To create the initial cluster resources, first log in to Redpanda Cloud with `rpk cloud login`, and then run `rpk cloud byoc aws apply`. This creates an autoscaling group, an agent VM, and the following resources:

* S3 objects
* Launch template
* Autoscaling group

NOTE: You must have the `iam_rpk_user.tf` permissions described in the prerequisites. 

```bash
rpk cloud login \
  --save \
  --client-id=${REDPANDCA_CLIENT_ID} \
  --client-secret=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET} \
  --no-profile

rpk cloud byoc aws apply \
  --redpanda-id=${REDPANDA_ID}
```

Output:

```bash
Checking RPK User... PASSED
Checking IAM Instance Profiles... PASSED
Checking Storage... PASSED
Checking Network... PASSED
Reconciling agent infrastructure...
Running apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-bootstrap"}
Finished apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-bootstrap"}
Running apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-network"}
Finished apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-network"}
Running apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-agent"}
Finished apply	{"provisioner": "redpanda-agent"}
The Redpanda cluster is deploying. This can take up to 45 minutes. View status at https://cloud.redpanda.com/clusters/${REDPANDA_ID}/overview.
```

The agent VM now is running and handles the remaining provisioning steps. This can take up to 45 minutes. When provisioning completes, the cluster status updates to `Running`. If the cluster remains in `Creating` status after 45 minutes, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda support^].

=== Validation checks

The `rpk cloud byoc aws apply` command performs validation checks before proceeding with provisioning:

* RPK user: Checks if the user running the command has sufficient privileges to provision the agent. Any
missing permissions are displayed in the output.

* IAM instance profile: Checks that `connectors_node_group_instance_profile`, `redpanda_node_group_instance_profile`,
`utility_node_group_instance_profile`, and `k8s_cluster_role` have the minimum required permissions. Any missing permissions are displayed in the output.

* Storage: Checks that the `management_bucket` exists and is versioned, checks that the `cloud_storage_bucket` exists and is not versioned, and checks that the `dynamodb_table` exists.

* Network: Checks that the VPC exists, checks that the subnets exist and have the expected tags, and checks that the security groups exist and have the desired ingress and egress rules.

If you think validation errors are erroneous, you can rerun the command with the `--no-validate` tag
to skip validation.

== Check cluster status

Cluster creation is an example of an operation that can take a longer period of time to complete. You can check the operation state with the Cloud API or check the Redpanda Cloud UI for cluster status.

Example using the operation ID returned from your create cluster command:

```bash
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/operations/<operation_id from cluster creation>" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer $YOUR_TOKEN"
```

Example retrieving cluster:

```bash
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/clusters/${REDPANDA_ID}" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer $YOUR_TOKEN"
```

== Delete cluster

To delete the Redpanda cluster with the Cloud API, run:

----
export REDPANDA_ID=$(curl -X DELETE "https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/clusters/${REDPANDA_ID}" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" | jq -r '.operation.resource_id')
----

After that completes, run: 

----
rpk cloud byoc aws destroy --redpanda-id ${REDPANDA_ID}
----
