modules/networking/pages/aws-privatelink.adoc, before:

= Configure AWS PrivateLink with the Cloud API
:description: Set up AWS PrivateLink to securely access Redpanda Cloud.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/aws-privatelink.adoc


include::shared:partial$feature-flag.adoc[]

NOTE: This guide is for configuring AWS PrivateLink using the Redpanda Cloud API. See xref:networking:configure-privatelink-in-cloud-ui.adoc[Configure PrivateLink in the Cloud UI] if you want to set up the endpoint service using the UI.

The Redpanda AWS PrivateLink endpoint service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own VPC. Traffic over PrivateLink does not go through the public internet because a PrivateLink connection is treated as its own private AWS service. While your VPC has access to the Redpanda VPC, Redpanda cannot access your VPC.

Consider using the PrivateLink endpoint service if you have multiple VPCs and could benefit from a more simplified approach to network management.

[NOTE]
====
* PrivateLink allows overlapping CIDR ranges in VPC networks.
* PrivateLink does not limit the number of VPC connections. However, VPC peering is limited to 125 connections. See https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink/faqs/[How scalable is AWS PrivateLink?^]
====

After <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token,getting an access token>>, you can <<create-new-cluster-with-privatelink-endpoint-service-enabled,enable PrivateLink when creating a new cluster>>, or you can <<enable-privatelink-endpoint-service-for-existing-clusters,enable PrivateLink for existing clusters>>.

TIP: Make sure to replace the variable values in the code examples on this page with your own values, before running the commands in the terminal or in a script.

== Requirements

* Install `rpk`.
* Your Redpanda cluster and <<create-client-vpc,VPC>> must be in the same region.
* In this guide, you use the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to enable the Redpanda endpoint service for your clusters. Follow the steps below to <<get-an-access-token,get an access token>>.
* Use the https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-getting-started.html[AWS CLI^] to create a new client VPC or modify an existing one to use the PrivateLink endpoint.

== Get a Cloud API access token

include::networking:partial$private-links-api-access-token.adoc[]

== Create new cluster with PrivateLink endpoint service enabled

. In the https://cloud.redpanda.com/[Redpanda Cloud UI^], go to **Resource groups** and select the resource group in which you want to create a cluster.
+
Copy and store the resource group ID (UUID) from the URL in the browser.
+
[,bash]
----
export RESOURCE_GROUP_ID=<uuid>
----

. Call xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/networks[`POST /v1beta2/networks`] to create a network.
+
Make sure to supply your own values in the following example request. Store the network ID (`network_id`) after the network is created to check whether you can proceed to cluster creation.
+
--
- `name`
- `cidr_block`
- `aws_region`
--
+
[,bash]
----
REGION=<aws_region>

NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "name": "<my-private-link-network>",
    "cidr_block": "<10.0.0.0/20>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "region": "$REGION"
}
EOF`

NETWORK_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/networks | jq .metadata.network_id`

echo $NETWORK_ID
----
+
Wait for the network to be ready before creating the cluster in the next step. You can check the state of the network creation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/networks/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/networks/\{id}`]. You can create the cluster when the state is `STATE_READY`.

. Create a new cluster with the endpoint service enabled by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/clusters[`POST /v1beta2/clusters`].
+
In the example below, make sure to set your own values for the following fields:
+
--
- `zones`: for example, `"usw2-az1","usw2-az2","usw2-az3"`
- `type`: `TYPE_DEDICATED` for Dedicated Cloud clusters, or `TYPE_BYOC` for BYOC clusters
- `tier`: for example, `tier-1-aws-v2-arm`
- `name`
- `connect_console`: Whether to enable connections to Redpanda Console (boolean)
- `allowed_principals`: Amazon Resource Names (ARNs) for the AWS principals allowed to access the endpoint service. For example, for all principals in an account, use `arn:aws:iam::account_id:root`. See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/configure-endpoint-service.html#add-remove-permission[Configure an endpoint service^] for details.
--
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
    "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
    "name": "<my-private-link-cluster>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
    "region": "$REGION",
    "zones": [ <zones> ],
    "throughput_tier": "<tier>",
    "type": "<type>",
    "aws_private_link": {
        "enabled": true,
        "connect_console": true,
        "allowed_principals": ["<principal_1>","<principal_2>"]
    }
}
EOF`

CLUSTER_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters | jq -r .operation.metadata.cluster_id`

echo $CLUSTER_ID
----
+
**BYOC clusters:** Check that the cluster operation is completed by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from the Create Cluster call.
+
When the Create Cluster operation is completed (`STATE_COMPLETED`), run the following `rpk cloud` command to finish setting up your BYOC cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cloud byoc aws apply --redpanda-id=$CLUSTER_ID
----

== Enable PrivateLink endpoint service for existing clusters

. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to the cluster overview and copy the cluster ID from the **Details** section.
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_ID=<cluster_id>
----

. Make a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#patch-/v1beta2/clusters/-cluster.id-[`PATCH /v1beta2/clusters/{cluster.id}`] request to update the cluster with the Redpanda Private Link Endpoint Service enabled.
+
In the example below, make sure to set your own value for the following field:
+
--
- `connect_console`: Whether to enable connections to Redpanda Console (boolean)
- `allowed_principals`: Amazon Resource Names (ARNs) for the AWS principals allowed to access the endpoint service. For example, for all principals in an account, use `arn:aws:iam::account_id:root`. See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/configure-endpoint-service.html#add-remove-permission[Configure an endpoint service^] for details.
--
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_PATCH_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "aws_private_link": {
    "enabled": true,
    "connect_console": true,
    "allowed_principals": ["<principal_1>","<principal_2>"]
  }
}
EOF`

curl -vv -X PATCH \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -d "$CLUSTER_PATCH_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID
----

. Before proceeding, check the state of the Update Cluster operation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from Update Cluster call. When the state is `STATE_READY`, proceed to the next step.

. Check the service state by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/clusters/\{id}`]. The `service_state` in the `aws_private_link.status` response object must be `Available` for you to <<connect-to-privatelink-endpoint-service,connect to the service>>.
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X GET \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq '.cluster.aws_private_link.status | {service_name, service_state}'
----

== Configure PrivateLink connection to Redpanda Cloud

When you have a PrivateLink-enabled cluster, you can create an endpoint to connect your VPC and your cluster.

=== Get cluster domain

Get the domain (`cluster_domain`) of the cluster from the cluster details in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

For example, if the bootstrap server URL is: `seed-3da65a4a.cki01qgth38kk81ard3g.fmc.dev.cloud.redpanda.com:9092`, then `cluster_domain` is: `cki01qgth38kk81ard3g.fmc.dev.cloud.redpanda.com`.

[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_DOMAIN=<cluster_domain>
----

=== Get name of PrivateLink endpoint service

The service name is required to <<create-vpc-endpoint,create VPC private endpoints>>. Run the following command to get the service name:

[,bash]
----
PL_SERVICE_NAME=`curl -X GET \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq -r .cluster.aws_private_link.status.service_name`
----

=== Create client VPC

If you are not using an existing VPC, you must create a new one.

[CAUTION]
====
xref:networking:byoc/aws/vpc-peering-aws.adoc[VPC peering] and PrivateLink will not work at the same time if you set them up on the same VPC where your Kafka clients run. PrivateLink endpoints take priority.

VPC peering and PrivateLink can both be used at the same time if Kafka clients are connecting from distinct VPCs. For example, in a private Redpanda cluster, you can connect your internal Kafka clients over VPC peering, and enable PrivateLink for external services.
====

The VPC region must be the same region where the Redpanda cluster is deployed. Run the following command to create the VPC:

[,bash]
----
# See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-files.html for
# information on profiles and credential files
PROFILE=<specific-profile-from-credential-file>

aws ec2 create-vpc --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --cidr-block 10.0.0.0/20

# Store the client VPC ID from the command output
CLIENT_VPC_ID=<client_vpc_id>
----

You can also use an existing VPC. You need the VPC ID to <<modify-vpc-dns-attributes,modify its DNS attributes>>.

=== Modify VPC DNS attributes

Modify the VPC attributes using the following commands:

[,bash]
----
aws ec2 modify-vpc-attribute --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --enable-dns-hostnames "{\"Value\":true}"

aws ec2 modify-vpc-attribute --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --enable-dns-support "{\"Value\":true}"
----

These commands enable DNS hostnames and resolution for instances in the VPC.

=== Create security group

You need the security group ID `security_group_id` from the command output to <<add-security-group-rules,add security group rules>>. Run the following command to create a security group:

[,bash]
----
aws ec2 create-security-group --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --description "Redpanda endpoint service client security group" \
    --group-name "${CLUSTER_ID}-sg"
SECURITY_GROUP_ID=<security_group_id>
----

=== Add security group rules

The example below to add security group rules is based on the assumption that the Redpanda broker count is three. If you are not using three brokers, modify the example:

* Replace `32094`,`32194`,`32294` with `32092 + <broker_count-1>`, `32192 + <broker_count-1>`, `32292 + <broker_count-1>`.
* Replace `35084`,`35184`,`35284` with `35082 + <broker_count-1>`, `35182 + <broker_count-1>`, `35282 + <broker_count-1>`.

[,bash]
----
# Allow Redpanda Kafka seed port
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 30292 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Allow Schema Registry port
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 30081 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Allow Panda Proxy port
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 30282 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Allow Redpanda Console connection
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 443-443 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Redpanda Kafka broker port ranges
#   There are three broker port ranges that alternate during normal system maintenance, and all three must be open. Adjust the end port number if the Redpanda broker count is not three.
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 32092-32094 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 32192-32194 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 32292-32294 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Redpanda Panda Proxy port ranges
#   There are three port ranges that alternate during normal system maintenance, and all three must be open. Adjust the end port number if the Redpanda broker count is not three.
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 35082-35084 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 35182-35184 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 35282-35284 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
----

=== Create VPC subnet

You need the subnet ID `subnet_id` from the command output to <<create-vpc-endpoint,create a VPC endpoint>>. Run the following command, specifying the subnet availability zone (for example, `usw2-az1`):

[,bash]
----
aws ec2 create-subnet --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --availability-zone <zone> \
    --cidr-block 10.0.1.0/24
SUBNET_ID=<subnet_id>
----

=== Create VPC endpoint

[,bash]
----
aws ec2 create-vpc-endpoint \
    --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --vpc-endpoint-type "Interface" \
    --ip-address-type "ipv4" \
    --service-name $PL_SERVICE_NAME \
    --subnet-ids $SUBNET_ID \
    --security-group-ids $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --private-dns-enabled
----

== Access Redpanda services through VPC endpoint

After you have enabled PrivateLink for your cluster, your connection URLs are available in the *How to Connect* section of the cluster overview in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

include::networking:partial$private-links-access-rp-services-through-vpc.adoc[]

== Test the connection

You can test the PrivateLink connection from any VM or container in the consumer VPC. If configuring a client isn't possible right away, you can do these checks using `rpk` or cURL:

include::networking:partial$private-links-test-connection.adoc[]

include::shared:partial$suggested-reading.adoc[]

* xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[]
* xref:networking:dedicated/vpc-peering.adoc[]
* xref:networking:byoc/aws/vpc-peering-aws.adoc[]

Commit message:

DOC-662 interrupted communication after private networking (#154)
* DOC-662 interrupted communication after private networking

* update tips

* incorporate feedback from Masa

* move to section for enable on existing clusters

* incorporate Masa's review feedback

modules/networking/pages/aws-privatelink.adoc, after:

= Configure AWS PrivateLink with the Cloud API
:description: Set up AWS PrivateLink to securely access Redpanda Cloud.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/aws-privatelink.adoc


include::shared:partial$feature-flag.adoc[]

NOTE: This guide is for configuring AWS PrivateLink using the Redpanda Cloud API. To configure and manage PrivateLink on an existing public cluster, you must use the Cloud API. See xref:networking:configure-privatelink-in-cloud-ui.adoc[Configure PrivateLink in the Cloud UI] if you want to set up the endpoint service using the Redpanda Cloud UI.

The Redpanda AWS PrivateLink endpoint service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own VPC. Traffic over PrivateLink does not go through the public internet because a PrivateLink connection is treated as its own private AWS service. While your VPC has access to the Redpanda VPC, Redpanda cannot access your VPC.

Consider using the PrivateLink endpoint service if you have multiple VPCs and could benefit from a more simplified approach to network management.

[NOTE]
====
* PrivateLink allows overlapping CIDR ranges in VPC networks.
* PrivateLink does not limit the number of VPC connections. However, VPC peering is limited to 125 connections. See https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink/faqs/[How scalable is AWS PrivateLink?^]
====

After <<get-a-cloud-api-access-token,getting an access token>>, you can <<create-new-cluster-with-privatelink-endpoint-service-enabled,enable PrivateLink when creating a new cluster>>, or you can <<enable-privatelink-endpoint-service-for-existing-clusters,enable PrivateLink for existing clusters>>.

== Requirements

* Install `rpk`.
* Your Redpanda cluster and <<create-client-vpc,VPC>> must be in the same region.
* In this guide, you use the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to enable the Redpanda endpoint service for your clusters. Follow the steps below to <<get-an-access-token,get an access token>>.
* Use the https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-getting-started.html[AWS CLI^] to create a new client VPC or modify an existing one to use the PrivateLink endpoint.

== Get a Cloud API access token

include::networking:partial$private-links-api-access-token.adoc[]

== Create new cluster with PrivateLink endpoint service enabled

. In the https://cloud.redpanda.com/[Redpanda Cloud UI^], go to **Resource groups** and select the resource group in which you want to create a cluster.
+
Copy and store the resource group ID (UUID) from the URL in the browser.
+
[,bash]
----
export RESOURCE_GROUP_ID=<uuid>
----

. Call xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/networks[`POST /v1beta2/networks`] to create a network.
+
Make sure to supply your own values in the following example request. Store the network ID (`network_id`) after the network is created to check whether you can proceed to cluster creation.
+
--
- `name`
- `cidr_block`
- `aws_region`
--
+
[,bash]
----
REGION=<aws_region>

NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "name": "<my-private-link-network>",
    "cidr_block": "<10.0.0.0/20>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "region": "$REGION"
}
EOF`

NETWORK_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/networks | jq .metadata.network_id`

echo $NETWORK_ID
----
+
Wait for the network to be ready before creating the cluster in the next step. You can check the state of the network creation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/networks/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/networks/\{id}`]. You can create the cluster when the state is `STATE_READY`.

. Create a new cluster with the endpoint service enabled by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/clusters[`POST /v1beta2/clusters`].
+
In the example below, make sure to set your own values for the following fields:
+
--
- `zones`: for example, `"usw2-az1","usw2-az2","usw2-az3"`
- `type`: `TYPE_DEDICATED` for Dedicated Cloud clusters, or `TYPE_BYOC` for BYOC clusters
- `tier`: for example, `tier-1-aws-v2-arm`
- `name`
- `connect_console`: Whether to enable connections to Redpanda Console (boolean)
- `allowed_principals`: Amazon Resource Names (ARNs) for the AWS principals allowed to access the endpoint service. For example, for all principals in an account, use `arn:aws:iam::account_id:root`. See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/configure-endpoint-service.html#add-remove-permission[Configure an endpoint service^] for details.
--
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
    "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
    "name": "<my-private-link-cluster>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
    "region": "$REGION",
    "zones": [ <zones> ],
    "throughput_tier": "<tier>",
    "type": "<type>",
    "aws_private_link": {
        "enabled": true,
        "connect_console": true,
        "allowed_principals": ["<principal_1>","<principal_2>"]
    }
}
EOF`

CLUSTER_ID=`curl -vv -X POST \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    -d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters | jq -r .operation.metadata.cluster_id`

echo $CLUSTER_ID
----
+
**BYOC clusters:** Check that the cluster operation is completed by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from the Create Cluster call.
+
When the Create Cluster operation is completed (`STATE_COMPLETED`), run the following `rpk cloud` command to finish setting up your BYOC cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cloud byoc aws apply --redpanda-id=$CLUSTER_ID
----

== Enable PrivateLink endpoint service for existing clusters

CAUTION: As soon as PrivateLink is available on your VPC, all communication on existing Redpanda bootstrap server and broker ports is interrupted due to the change on the private DNS resolution. Make sure all applications running in your VPC are ready to start using the corresponding PrivateLink ports.

. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to the cluster overview and copy the cluster ID from the **Details** section.
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_ID=<cluster_id>
----

. Make a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#patch-/v1beta2/clusters/-cluster.id-[`PATCH /v1beta2/clusters/{cluster.id}`] request to update the cluster with the Redpanda Private Link Endpoint Service enabled.
+
In the example below, make sure to set your own value for the following field:
+
--
- `connect_console`: Whether to enable connections to Redpanda Console (boolean)
- `allowed_principals`: Amazon Resource Names (ARNs) for the AWS principals allowed to access the endpoint service. For example, for all principals in an account, use `arn:aws:iam::account_id:root`. See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/configure-endpoint-service.html#add-remove-permission[Configure an endpoint service^] for details.
--
+
[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_PATCH_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "aws_private_link": {
    "enabled": true,
    "connect_console": true,
    "allowed_principals": ["<principal_1>","<principal_2>"]
  }
}
EOF`

curl -vv -X PATCH \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -d "$CLUSTER_PATCH_BODY" $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID
----

. Before proceeding, check the state of the Update Cluster operation by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/operations/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/operations/\{id}`], and passing the operation ID returned from Update Cluster call. When the state is `STATE_READY`, proceed to the next step.

. Check the service state by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#get-/v1beta2/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1beta2/clusters/\{id}`]. The `service_state` in the `aws_private_link.status` response object must be `Available` for you to <<connect-to-privatelink-endpoint-service,connect to the service>>.
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X GET \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
    $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq '.cluster.aws_private_link.status | {service_name, service_state}'
----

== Configure PrivateLink connection to Redpanda Cloud

When you have a PrivateLink-enabled cluster, you can create an endpoint to connect your VPC and your cluster.

=== Get cluster domain

Get the domain (`cluster_domain`) of the cluster from the cluster details in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

For example, if the bootstrap server URL is: `seed-3da65a4a.cki01qgth38kk81ard3g.fmc.dev.cloud.redpanda.com:9092`, then `cluster_domain` is: `cki01qgth38kk81ard3g.fmc.dev.cloud.redpanda.com`.

[,bash]
----
CLUSTER_DOMAIN=<cluster_domain>
----

=== Get name of PrivateLink endpoint service

The service name is required to <<create-vpc-endpoint,create VPC private endpoints>>. Run the following command to get the service name:

[,bash]
----
PL_SERVICE_NAME=`curl -X GET \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  $PUBLIC_API_ENDPOINT/v1beta2/clusters/$CLUSTER_ID | jq -r .cluster.aws_private_link.status.service_name`
----

=== Create client VPC

If you are not using an existing VPC, you must create a new one.

[CAUTION]
====
xref:networking:byoc/aws/vpc-peering-aws.adoc[VPC peering] and PrivateLink will not work at the same time if you set them up on the same VPC where your Kafka clients run. PrivateLink endpoints take priority.

VPC peering and PrivateLink can both be used at the same time if Kafka clients are connecting from distinct VPCs. For example, in a private Redpanda cluster, you can connect your internal Kafka clients over VPC peering, and enable PrivateLink for external services.
====

The VPC region must be the same region where the Redpanda cluster is deployed. Run the following command to create the VPC:

[,bash]
----
# See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-files.html for
# information on profiles and credential files
PROFILE=<specific-profile-from-credential-file>

aws ec2 create-vpc --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --cidr-block 10.0.0.0/20

# Store the client VPC ID from the command output
CLIENT_VPC_ID=<client_vpc_id>
----

You can also use an existing VPC. You need the VPC ID to <<modify-vpc-dns-attributes,modify its DNS attributes>>.

=== Modify VPC DNS attributes

Modify the VPC attributes using the following commands:

[,bash]
----
aws ec2 modify-vpc-attribute --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --enable-dns-hostnames "{\"Value\":true}"

aws ec2 modify-vpc-attribute --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --enable-dns-support "{\"Value\":true}"
----

These commands enable DNS hostnames and resolution for instances in the VPC.

=== Create security group

You need the security group ID `security_group_id` from the command output to <<add-security-group-rules,add security group rules>>. Run the following command to create a security group:

[,bash]
----
aws ec2 create-security-group --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --description "Redpanda endpoint service client security group" \
    --group-name "${CLUSTER_ID}-sg"
SECURITY_GROUP_ID=<security_group_id>
----

=== Add security group rules

The example below to add security group rules is based on the assumption that the Redpanda broker count is three. If you are not using three brokers, modify the example:

* Replace `32094`,`32194`,`32294` with `32092 + <broker_count-1>`, `32192 + <broker_count-1>`, `32292 + <broker_count-1>`.
* Replace `35084`,`35184`,`35284` with `35082 + <broker_count-1>`, `35182 + <broker_count-1>`, `35282 + <broker_count-1>`.

[,bash]
----
# Allow Redpanda Kafka seed port
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 30292 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Allow Schema Registry port
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 30081 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Allow Panda Proxy port
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 30282 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Allow Redpanda Console connection
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 443-443 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Redpanda Kafka broker port ranges
#   There are three broker port ranges that alternate during normal system maintenance, and all three must be open. Adjust the end port number if the Redpanda broker count is not three.
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 32092-32094 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 32192-32194 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 32292-32294 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
# Redpanda Panda Proxy port ranges
#   There are three port ranges that alternate during normal system maintenance, and all three must be open. Adjust the end port number if the Redpanda broker count is not three.
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 35082-35084 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 35182-35184 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --group-id $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --protocol "tcp" \
    --port 35282-35284 \
    --cidr 0.0.0.0/0
----

=== Create VPC subnet

You need the subnet ID `subnet_id` from the command output to <<create-vpc-endpoint,create a VPC endpoint>>. Run the following command, specifying the subnet availability zone (for example, `usw2-az1`):

[,bash]
----
aws ec2 create-subnet --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --availability-zone <zone> \
    --cidr-block 10.0.1.0/24
SUBNET_ID=<subnet_id>
----

=== Create VPC endpoint

[,bash]
----
aws ec2 create-vpc-endpoint \
    --region $REGION --profile $PROFILE \
    --vpc-id $CLIENT_VPC_ID \
    --vpc-endpoint-type "Interface" \
    --ip-address-type "ipv4" \
    --service-name $PL_SERVICE_NAME \
    --subnet-ids $SUBNET_ID \
    --security-group-ids $SECURITY_GROUP_ID \
    --private-dns-enabled
----

== Access Redpanda services through VPC endpoint

After you have enabled PrivateLink for your cluster, your connection URLs are available in the *How to Connect* section of the cluster overview in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

include::networking:partial$private-links-access-rp-services-through-vpc.adoc[]

== Test the connection

You can test the PrivateLink connection from any VM or container in the consumer VPC. If configuring a client isn't possible right away, you can do these checks using `rpk` or cURL:

include::networking:partial$private-links-test-connection.adoc[]

include::shared:partial$suggested-reading.adoc[]

* xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[]
* xref:networking:dedicated/vpc-peering.adoc[]
* xref:networking:byoc/aws/vpc-peering-aws.adoc[]
