modules/networking/pages/cloud-security-network.adoc, before:

= Network Design and Ports
:description: Learn how Redpanda Cloud manages network security and connectivity.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/security/cloud-security-network.adoc


Redpanda Cloud deploys different types of networks for public Redpanda
clusters and for private Redpanda clusters. By default, networks are always
laid out across multiple availability zones (AZs) to enable the creation of one or
many single and multi-AZ Redpanda clusters within them.

== Public vs private network designs

The following table compares public and private Redpanda clusters:

[cols="1,2,2"]
|===
| Feature | Public clusters | Private clusters

| Access | Internet-accessible endpoints | Access only through VPC peering or private service connectivity (AWS PrivateLink, Azure Private Link, or GCP Private Service Connect)
| Security | SASL/SCRAM authentication + TLS encryption | SASL/SCRAM authentication + TLS encryption + network isolation
| Use case | Development, testing, or scenarios where public access is needed | Production environments requiring heightened security
|===

The Redpanda Cloud agent (sometimes called the glossterm:data plane[] agent) provisions, configures, and maintains cluster resources, including the network. Each agent has a dedicated operations queue in the glossterm:control plane[] through which it pulls and materializes cluster definition documents into cloud infrastructure resources. For BYOC clusters, agents are provisioned by the user with `rpk`. For more information, see xref:get-started:byoc-arch.adoc[BYOC Architecture].

=== Public Redpanda clusters

Public Redpanda clusters deploy networks segmented by workload type. Public clusters deploy brokers in public subnets. Redpanda ports are protected by SASL/SCRAM authentication (SCRAM-SHA-256, SCRAM-SHA-512) and encrypted in transit using TLS 1.2. Everything else is deployed on private subnets.

=== Private Redpanda clusters

Private Redpanda clusters also deploy networks segmented by workload type. Brokers are placed on private subnets, accessible from within the same VPC or from VPC peerings or private connectivity. The Redpanda Cloud agent and Redpanda Connect nodes are placed in distinct subnets, segmented away from Redpanda services by routing and firewall rules. 

The private link service (AWS PrivateLink, Azure Private Link, or GCP Private Service Connect) and VPC peering connections are used to connect to the Redpanda cluster. 

==== Private network data flows

Data flows are the network traffic that carries data, such as messages produced to a topic or consumed from a topic. 

The following diagram shows the data flows from private Redpanda clusters. 

image::shared:data-flows.png[Redpanda Cloud private cluster data flows]

==== Private network metadata flows

Metadata flows are the network traffic that carries metadata, such as telemetry and cluster configuration. The Redpanda Cloud agent uses metadata flows to share with the control plane connection endpoints, cluster readiness, and status.

The following diagram shows the metadata flows from private Redpanda clusters. 

image::shared:metadata-flows.png[Redpanda Cloud private cluster metadata flows]

==== Private network control flows

Control flows are the network traffic that carries control messages, such as cluster upgrades and configuration updates. The Redpanda Cloud agent uses control flows to manage the cluster. Occasionally, incident responders use control flows to mitigate incidents when automated controls are insufficient.

The following diagram shows the control flows from private Redpanda clusters.

image::shared:control-flows.png[Redpanda Cloud private cluster control flows]

== Network ports

This section lists the external ports on which Redpanda Cloud components communicate. Redpanda manages security group and firewall configurations, but if you need to add to your own rule sets, these are the available network ports. The following table provides a quick reference of network ports: 

|===
| Direction | Purpose | Ports

| North-south | External client access | 30092, 9092, 30081, 30082, 443
| East-west | Internal cluster communication | 30092, 9092, 8081, 8082, 33145, 30644, 8083
| South-north | Outgoing connections | 443, 80
|===

NOTE: Redpanda also uses some ports for internal communication inside the cluster, including ports 80 and 9644. 

=== North-south

The following table lists the network ports available to external clients within
each data plane. For private clusters, access to these ports is
only possible through Redpanda Cloud network connections such as xref:networking:dedicated/vpc-peering.adoc[VPC peering],
transit gateway attachments, or private service connectivity.

|===
| Service | Port

| Kafka API
| 30092/tcp

| Kafka API bootstrap
| 9092/tcp

| Schema Registry
| 30081/tcp

| Kafka HTTP Proxy and Kafka HTTP Proxy bootstrap
| 30082/tcp

| Redpanda Console, Data Plane API, Prometheus metrics
| 443/tcp
|===

=== East-west

The following table lists the network ports available within each data plane for
internal communication only.

|===
| Service | Port

| Kafka API
| 30092/tcp

| Kafka API bootstrap
| 9092/tcp

| Schema Registry
| 8081/tcp

| Kafka HTTP Proxy
| 8082/tcp

| Redpanda RPC
| 33145/tcp

| Redpanda Admin API
| 30644/tcp

| Kafka Connect API
| 8083/tcp
|===

=== South-north

The following network port is used for outgoing network connections outside the VPC. DNS and NTP ports are not included because those network flows do not leave the cloud provider's network, and they reach the internal cloud provider services within the VPC.

|===
| Service | Port

| Control plane, breakglass, artifact repository, and telemetry
| 443/tcp, 80/tcp
|===

== Private service connectivity network ports

=== North-south

When private service connectivity is enabled (AWS PrivateLink, Azure Private Link, or GCP Private Service Connect), the following network ports are made available to external clients:

|===
| Service | Port

| Kafka API
| 32000-32500/tcp

| Kafka API bootstrap
| 30292/tcp

| Schema Registry
| 30081/tcp

| Kafka HTTP Proxy
| 35000-35500/tcp

| Kafka HTTP Proxy bootstrap
| 30282/tcp

| Redpanda Console, Data Plane API, Prometheus metrics
| 443/tcp
|===


== NAT gateways

A NAT (Network Address Translation) gateway allows resources in a private network to access the internet, while blocking inbound connections.

Redpanda Cloud clusters require outbound-only internet access for control plane connectivity, upgrades, and telemetry. The way NAT gateways are provisioned depends on your cloud provider and deployment type:

* *BYOVPC/BYOVNet:* You are responsible for providing internet access, as you fully manage the network.
* *BYOC/Dedicated* on *AWS:* Redpanda provisions one NAT gateway and one internet gateway for outbound-only access.
* *BYOC/Dedicated* on *Azure:* Redpanda provisions one NAT gateway and a `/31` public IP prefix (two usable IPs) for outbound-only access.
* *BYOC/Dedicated* on *GCP:* Redpanda provisions one NAT gateway and one internet gateway for outbound-only access.

The following table summarizes when a NAT gateway is required:

|===
| Traffic type | NAT gateway required? | Notes

| Redpanda streaming traffic | No | 
| Redpanda Tiered Storage traffic | No | *AWS*: All connections are done through a VPC gateway endpoint in the VPC. BYOVPC customers must ensure that this VPC endpoint exists in the VPC and that routing rules are configured appropriately.

*Azure*: Three Private Link endpoints are used by Redpanda brokers to access Azure Blob Storage.

*GCP*: Tiered Storage data transfer is free within the same region.
| Redpanda provisioning and telemetry | Yes | There is a minimal usage for artifact downloads and metrics.
| Internet-facing connectors | Yes | Internet-facing connectors incur NAT data transfer charges.
|===

[NOTE]
====
GCP public clusters use multiple NAT gateways with dynamic IP allocation. For GCP public clusters, do not use specific NAT gateway IP addresses for allowlisting or firewall rules.
====

=== Allowlist the NAT gateway

Redpanda Connect and Kafka Connect connectors that egress to the internet can incur NAT data transfer costs. You can add the NAT gateway IP address to your data source allowlist, if needed. 

Redpanda Data does not guarantee that the NAT gateway IP will remain static, but it is unlikely to change.

For BYOC and Dedicated clusters, you can find the NAT gateway IP on the cluster *Overview* page or in the response body of the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1/clusters/\{id}`] API request.


== Cloud provider network services

Each cloud provider offers specific network services integrated with Redpanda Cloud:

[tabs]
====
AWS::
+
--
* *Time synchronization*
+
Redpanda Cloud uses the https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2017/11/introducing-the-amazon-time-sync-service/[Amazon Time Sync Service^], a fleet of redundant satellite-connected and atomic reference clocks in AWS regions.

* *Domain name system (DNS)*
+
Redpanda Cloud creates a new DNS zone for each cluster in the control plane and delegates its management exclusively to each cluster's data plane. In turn, the data plane creates a hosted zone in Route 53, managing DNS records for Redpanda services as needed. All interactions with Route 53 are controlled by IAM policies targeted to the specific Route 53 resources managed by each data plane, following the principle of least privilege.
+
The Route 53-hosted DNS zone in the data plane has the following naming convention: 
+
** BYOC/BYOVPC/BYOVNet: `[cluster_id].byoc.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`
** Dedicated: `[cluster_id].fmc.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`

* *Distributed denial of service (DDoS) protection*
+
All Redpanda Cloud services publicly exposed in the control plane and data plane are protected against the most common layer 3 and 4 DDoS attacks by https://aws.amazon.com/shield/features/#AWS_Shield_Standard[AWS Shield Standard^], with no latency impact.

* *VPC peering*
+
VPC peering against Redpanda Cloud networks allows users to connect to private clusters without traversing the public internet. You can establish VPC peering connections between two VPCs with non-overlapping network addresses. When creating a network intended for peering, ensure that the specified network address range does not overlap with the network address range of the destination VPC.
+
_Security best practice:_ When using VPC peering, always reject all network traffic initiated from a Redpanda Cloud network and only accept traffic from trusted connectors.

* *AWS PrivateLink*
+
AWS PrivateLink lets you connect to cluster services using unidirectional TCP connections that client applications can only initiate. These applications can run from multiple customer-managed VPCs, even if their CIDR ranges overlap with the Redpanda cluster VPC. 
+
AWS PrivateLink is configured against the Redpanda cluster's network load balancer. All client connections to cluster services pass through this load balancer. You configure PrivateLink with the Redpanda Cloud UI or Cloud API, and it is protected by an allowlist of principal ARNs during creation. Only those principals can create VPC endpoint attachments to the PrivateLink service. 
--

Azure::
+
--
* *Time synchronization*
+
Redpanda Cloud synchronizes time through the underlying Azure host, which uses internal Microsoft time servers that get their time from Microsoft-owned Stratum 1 devices with GPS antennas. 

* *Domain name system (DNS)*
+
Redpanda Cloud creates a new DNS zone for each cluster in the control plane and delegates its management exclusively to each cluster's agent. In turn, the agent creates an Azure DNS zone and manages the DNS records for Redpanda services, as needed. All Azure API interactions with Azure DNS are done through a user-assigned managed identity, with constrained Azure RBAC permissions, following the principle of least privilege.
+
The DNS zone in the data plane has the following naming convention: 
+
** BYOC: `[cluster_id].byoc.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`
** Dedicated: `[cluster_id].fmc.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`

* *Distributed denial of service (DDoS) protection*
+
All Redpanda Cloud services publicly exposed in the control plane are protected against the most common layer 3 and 4 DDoS attacks by AWS. Data plane services in Azure are not protected by default against common network-level DDoS attacks. Azure customers are fully responsible for enabling this protection, because it has an added cost.

* *VNet peering*
+
VNet peering against Redpanda Cloud networks allows users to connect to private clusters without traversing the public internet. 
+
NOTE: VNet peering in Azure is in limited availability. 
+
VNet peering connections can only be established between two or more VNets with non-overlapping network addresses. When creating a Redpanda Cloud network for peering, make sure the Redpanda network address range does not overlap with the network address range of the destination VNet.
+
_Security best practice:_ When using VNet peering, always reject all network traffic initiated from a Redpanda Cloud network and only accept traffic from trusted connectors.
+
Unlike AWS and GCP, Azure charges $0.01 per GB transferred over a VNet peering, in either direction. For high-throughput use cases, consider using BYOVPC clusters. With BYOVPC, client application workloads are deployed on the same VNet as the Redpanda brokers, avoiding additional data transfer costs.

* *Azure Private Link*
+
Azure Private Link lets you connect to cluster services using an unidirectional TCP connection that can only be initiated by client applications. These applications can run from multiple customer-managed VNets, even if their CIDR ranges overlap with the Redpanda cluster VNet. 
+
Redpanda configures Private Link against the cluster's Azure load balancer. All client connections to the Redpanda cluster services pass through this load balancer. You configure Private Link with the Redpanda Cloud UI or the Cloud API, and it is protected during creation by an allowlist of Azure subscription IDs. Only allowlisted subscriptions can create private endpoint attachments to the cluster's Private Link service.
--

GCP::
+
--
* *Time synchronization*
+
Redpanda Cloud uses https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/configure-ntp#linux-chrony[Google NTP Servers^], a fleet of satellite-connected and atomic reference clocks.

* *Domain name system (DNS)*
+
Redpanda Cloud creates a new DNS zone for each cluster in the control plane and delegates its management exclusively to each cluster's data plane. In turn, the data plane creates a managed zone in Cloud DNS, managing DNS records for Redpanda services, as needed. All interactions with Cloud DNS are controlled by IAM policies targeted to the specific Cloud DNS resources managed by each data plane, following the principle of least privilege.

* *Distributed denial of service (DDoS) protection*
+
All Redpanda Cloud services publicly exposed in the control plane and data plane are protected against the most common layer 3 and 4 DDoS attacks by https://cloud.google.com/armor/docs/advanced-network-ddos[Google Cloud Armor Standard^], with no latency impact.

* *VPC peering*
+
VPC peering against Redpanda Cloud networks allows users to connect to private clusters without traversing the public internet. You can establish VPC peering connections between two VPCs with non-overlapping network addresses. When creating a network intended for peering, ensure that the specified network address range does not overlap with the network address range of the destination VPC.
+
_Security best practice:_ When using VPC peering, always reject all network traffic initiated from a Redpanda Cloud network and only accept traffic from trusted connectors.

* *GCP Private Service Connect*
+
GCP Private Service Connect lets you connect to cluster services using a unidirectional TCP connection that can only be initiated by client applications. These applications can run from multiple customer-managed VPCs, even if their CIDR ranges overlap with the Redpanda cluster VPC. 
+
Redpanda configures a Private Service Connect producer against the cluster's network load balancer. All client connections to the Redpanda cluster services pass through this load balancer. You configure a Private Service Connect publisher with the Redpanda Cloud UI or the Cloud API. It is protected during creation by a consumer accept list of GCP networks or project IDs. Only those consumers can create consumer endpoints to the Redpanda cluster's Private Service Connect published service.
--
====

== Suggested reading

* xref:get-started:cloud-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud overview]
* xref:get-started:byoc-arch.adoc[BYOC architecture]
* xref:networking:byoc/index.adoc[BYOC networking]
* xref:networking:dedicated/index.adoc[Dedicated networking]

Commit message:

Bump xref cleanup (#389)
* Continue URL migration batch - update cloud-api references, fix deprecation policy header

* remaining updates

* These topics are migrated to Bump

* Missed edits

* Missed edits

modules/networking/pages/cloud-security-network.adoc, after:

= Network Design and Ports
:description: Learn how Redpanda Cloud manages network security and connectivity.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/security/cloud-security-network.adoc


Redpanda Cloud deploys different types of networks for public Redpanda
clusters and for private Redpanda clusters. By default, networks are always
laid out across multiple availability zones (AZs) to enable the creation of one or
many single and multi-AZ Redpanda clusters within them.

== Public vs private network designs

The following table compares public and private Redpanda clusters:

[cols="1,2,2"]
|===
| Feature | Public clusters | Private clusters

| Access | Internet-accessible endpoints | Access only through VPC peering or private service connectivity (AWS PrivateLink, Azure Private Link, or GCP Private Service Connect)
| Security | SASL/SCRAM authentication + TLS encryption | SASL/SCRAM authentication + TLS encryption + network isolation
| Use case | Development, testing, or scenarios where public access is needed | Production environments requiring heightened security
|===

The Redpanda Cloud agent (sometimes called the glossterm:data plane[] agent) provisions, configures, and maintains cluster resources, including the network. Each agent has a dedicated operations queue in the glossterm:control plane[] through which it pulls and materializes cluster definition documents into cloud infrastructure resources. For BYOC clusters, agents are provisioned by the user with `rpk`. For more information, see xref:get-started:byoc-arch.adoc[BYOC Architecture].

=== Public Redpanda clusters

Public Redpanda clusters deploy networks segmented by workload type. Public clusters deploy brokers in public subnets. Redpanda ports are protected by SASL/SCRAM authentication (SCRAM-SHA-256, SCRAM-SHA-512) and encrypted in transit using TLS 1.2. Everything else is deployed on private subnets.

=== Private Redpanda clusters

Private Redpanda clusters also deploy networks segmented by workload type. Brokers are placed on private subnets, accessible from within the same VPC or from VPC peerings or private connectivity. The Redpanda Cloud agent and Redpanda Connect nodes are placed in distinct subnets, segmented away from Redpanda services by routing and firewall rules. 

The private link service (AWS PrivateLink, Azure Private Link, or GCP Private Service Connect) and VPC peering connections are used to connect to the Redpanda cluster. 

==== Private network data flows

Data flows are the network traffic that carries data, such as messages produced to a topic or consumed from a topic. 

The following diagram shows the data flows from private Redpanda clusters. 

image::shared:data-flows.png[Redpanda Cloud private cluster data flows]

==== Private network metadata flows

Metadata flows are the network traffic that carries metadata, such as telemetry and cluster configuration. The Redpanda Cloud agent uses metadata flows to share with the control plane connection endpoints, cluster readiness, and status.

The following diagram shows the metadata flows from private Redpanda clusters. 

image::shared:metadata-flows.png[Redpanda Cloud private cluster metadata flows]

==== Private network control flows

Control flows are the network traffic that carries control messages, such as cluster upgrades and configuration updates. The Redpanda Cloud agent uses control flows to manage the cluster. Occasionally, incident responders use control flows to mitigate incidents when automated controls are insufficient.

The following diagram shows the control flows from private Redpanda clusters.

image::shared:control-flows.png[Redpanda Cloud private cluster control flows]

== Network ports

This section lists the external ports on which Redpanda Cloud components communicate. Redpanda manages security group and firewall configurations, but if you need to add to your own rule sets, these are the available network ports. The following table provides a quick reference of network ports: 

|===
| Direction | Purpose | Ports

| North-south | External client access | 30092, 9092, 30081, 30082, 443
| East-west | Internal cluster communication | 30092, 9092, 8081, 8082, 33145, 30644, 8083
| South-north | Outgoing connections | 443, 80
|===

NOTE: Redpanda also uses some ports for internal communication inside the cluster, including ports 80 and 9644. 

=== North-south

The following table lists the network ports available to external clients within
each data plane. For private clusters, access to these ports is
only possible through Redpanda Cloud network connections such as xref:networking:dedicated/vpc-peering.adoc[VPC peering],
transit gateway attachments, or private service connectivity.

|===
| Service | Port

| Kafka API
| 30092/tcp

| Kafka API bootstrap
| 9092/tcp

| Schema Registry
| 30081/tcp

| Kafka HTTP Proxy and Kafka HTTP Proxy bootstrap
| 30082/tcp

| Redpanda Console, Data Plane API, Prometheus metrics
| 443/tcp
|===

=== East-west

The following table lists the network ports available within each data plane for
internal communication only.

|===
| Service | Port

| Kafka API
| 30092/tcp

| Kafka API bootstrap
| 9092/tcp

| Schema Registry
| 8081/tcp

| Kafka HTTP Proxy
| 8082/tcp

| Redpanda RPC
| 33145/tcp

| Redpanda Admin API
| 30644/tcp

| Kafka Connect API
| 8083/tcp
|===

=== South-north

The following network port is used for outgoing network connections outside the VPC. DNS and NTP ports are not included because those network flows do not leave the cloud provider's network, and they reach the internal cloud provider services within the VPC.

|===
| Service | Port

| Control plane, breakglass, artifact repository, and telemetry
| 443/tcp, 80/tcp
|===

== Private service connectivity network ports

=== North-south

When private service connectivity is enabled (AWS PrivateLink, Azure Private Link, or GCP Private Service Connect), the following network ports are made available to external clients:

|===
| Service | Port

| Kafka API
| 32000-32500/tcp

| Kafka API bootstrap
| 30292/tcp

| Schema Registry
| 30081/tcp

| Kafka HTTP Proxy
| 35000-35500/tcp

| Kafka HTTP Proxy bootstrap
| 30282/tcp

| Redpanda Console, Data Plane API, Prometheus metrics
| 443/tcp
|===


== NAT gateways

A NAT (Network Address Translation) gateway allows resources in a private network to access the internet, while blocking inbound connections.

Redpanda Cloud clusters require outbound-only internet access for control plane connectivity, upgrades, and telemetry. The way NAT gateways are provisioned depends on your cloud provider and deployment type:

* *BYOVPC/BYOVNet:* You are responsible for providing internet access, as you fully manage the network.
* *BYOC/Dedicated* on *AWS:* Redpanda provisions one NAT gateway and one internet gateway for outbound-only access.
* *BYOC/Dedicated* on *Azure:* Redpanda provisions one NAT gateway and a `/31` public IP prefix (two usable IPs) for outbound-only access.
* *BYOC/Dedicated* on *GCP:* Redpanda provisions one NAT gateway and one internet gateway for outbound-only access.

The following table summarizes when a NAT gateway is required:

|===
| Traffic type | NAT gateway required? | Notes

| Redpanda streaming traffic | No | 
| Redpanda Tiered Storage traffic | No | *AWS*: All connections are done through a VPC gateway endpoint in the VPC. BYOVPC customers must ensure that this VPC endpoint exists in the VPC and that routing rules are configured appropriately.

*Azure*: Three Private Link endpoints are used by Redpanda brokers to access Azure Blob Storage.

*GCP*: Tiered Storage data transfer is free within the same region.
| Redpanda provisioning and telemetry | Yes | There is a minimal usage for artifact downloads and metrics.
| Internet-facing connectors | Yes | Internet-facing connectors incur NAT data transfer charges.
|===

[NOTE]
====
GCP public clusters use multiple NAT gateways with dynamic IP allocation. For GCP public clusters, do not use specific NAT gateway IP addresses for allowlisting or firewall rules.
====

=== Allowlist the NAT gateway

Redpanda Connect and Kafka Connect connectors that egress to the internet can incur NAT data transfer costs. You can add the NAT gateway IP address to your data source allowlist, if needed. 

Redpanda Data does not guarantee that the NAT gateway IP will remain static, but it is unlikely to change.

For BYOC and Dedicated clusters, you can find the NAT gateway IP on the cluster *Overview* page or in the response body of the link:/api/doc/cloud-controlplane/operation/operation-clusterservice_getcluster[`GET /v1/clusters/\{id}`] API request.


== Cloud provider network services

Each cloud provider offers specific network services integrated with Redpanda Cloud:

[tabs]
====
AWS::
+
--
* *Time synchronization*
+
Redpanda Cloud uses the https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2017/11/introducing-the-amazon-time-sync-service/[Amazon Time Sync Service^], a fleet of redundant satellite-connected and atomic reference clocks in AWS regions.

* *Domain name system (DNS)*
+
Redpanda Cloud creates a new DNS zone for each cluster in the control plane and delegates its management exclusively to each cluster's data plane. In turn, the data plane creates a hosted zone in Route 53, managing DNS records for Redpanda services as needed. All interactions with Route 53 are controlled by IAM policies targeted to the specific Route 53 resources managed by each data plane, following the principle of least privilege.
+
The Route 53-hosted DNS zone in the data plane has the following naming convention: 
+
** BYOC/BYOVPC/BYOVNet: `[cluster_id].byoc.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`
** Dedicated: `[cluster_id].fmc.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`

* *Distributed denial of service (DDoS) protection*
+
All Redpanda Cloud services publicly exposed in the control plane and data plane are protected against the most common layer 3 and 4 DDoS attacks by https://aws.amazon.com/shield/features/#AWS_Shield_Standard[AWS Shield Standard^], with no latency impact.

* *VPC peering*
+
VPC peering against Redpanda Cloud networks allows users to connect to private clusters without traversing the public internet. You can establish VPC peering connections between two VPCs with non-overlapping network addresses. When creating a network intended for peering, ensure that the specified network address range does not overlap with the network address range of the destination VPC.
+
_Security best practice:_ When using VPC peering, always reject all network traffic initiated from a Redpanda Cloud network and only accept traffic from trusted connectors.

* *AWS PrivateLink*
+
AWS PrivateLink lets you connect to cluster services using unidirectional TCP connections that client applications can only initiate. These applications can run from multiple customer-managed VPCs, even if their CIDR ranges overlap with the Redpanda cluster VPC. 
+
AWS PrivateLink is configured against the Redpanda cluster's network load balancer. All client connections to cluster services pass through this load balancer. You configure PrivateLink with the Redpanda Cloud UI or Cloud API, and it is protected by an allowlist of principal ARNs during creation. Only those principals can create VPC endpoint attachments to the PrivateLink service. 
--

Azure::
+
--
* *Time synchronization*
+
Redpanda Cloud synchronizes time through the underlying Azure host, which uses internal Microsoft time servers that get their time from Microsoft-owned Stratum 1 devices with GPS antennas. 

* *Domain name system (DNS)*
+
Redpanda Cloud creates a new DNS zone for each cluster in the control plane and delegates its management exclusively to each cluster's agent. In turn, the agent creates an Azure DNS zone and manages the DNS records for Redpanda services, as needed. All Azure API interactions with Azure DNS are done through a user-assigned managed identity, with constrained Azure RBAC permissions, following the principle of least privilege.
+
The DNS zone in the data plane has the following naming convention: 
+
** BYOC: `[cluster_id].byoc.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`
** Dedicated: `[cluster_id].fmc.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`

* *Distributed denial of service (DDoS) protection*
+
All Redpanda Cloud services publicly exposed in the control plane are protected against the most common layer 3 and 4 DDoS attacks by AWS. Data plane services in Azure are not protected by default against common network-level DDoS attacks. Azure customers are fully responsible for enabling this protection, because it has an added cost.

* *VNet peering*
+
VNet peering against Redpanda Cloud networks allows users to connect to private clusters without traversing the public internet. 
+
NOTE: VNet peering in Azure is in limited availability. 
+
VNet peering connections can only be established between two or more VNets with non-overlapping network addresses. When creating a Redpanda Cloud network for peering, make sure the Redpanda network address range does not overlap with the network address range of the destination VNet.
+
_Security best practice:_ When using VNet peering, always reject all network traffic initiated from a Redpanda Cloud network and only accept traffic from trusted connectors.
+
Unlike AWS and GCP, Azure charges $0.01 per GB transferred over a VNet peering, in either direction. For high-throughput use cases, consider using BYOVPC clusters. With BYOVPC, client application workloads are deployed on the same VNet as the Redpanda brokers, avoiding additional data transfer costs.

* *Azure Private Link*
+
Azure Private Link lets you connect to cluster services using an unidirectional TCP connection that can only be initiated by client applications. These applications can run from multiple customer-managed VNets, even if their CIDR ranges overlap with the Redpanda cluster VNet. 
+
Redpanda configures Private Link against the cluster's Azure load balancer. All client connections to the Redpanda cluster services pass through this load balancer. You configure Private Link with the Redpanda Cloud UI or the Cloud API, and it is protected during creation by an allowlist of Azure subscription IDs. Only allowlisted subscriptions can create private endpoint attachments to the cluster's Private Link service.
--

GCP::
+
--
* *Time synchronization*
+
Redpanda Cloud uses https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/configure-ntp#linux-chrony[Google NTP Servers^], a fleet of satellite-connected and atomic reference clocks.

* *Domain name system (DNS)*
+
Redpanda Cloud creates a new DNS zone for each cluster in the control plane and delegates its management exclusively to each cluster's data plane. In turn, the data plane creates a managed zone in Cloud DNS, managing DNS records for Redpanda services, as needed. All interactions with Cloud DNS are controlled by IAM policies targeted to the specific Cloud DNS resources managed by each data plane, following the principle of least privilege.

* *Distributed denial of service (DDoS) protection*
+
All Redpanda Cloud services publicly exposed in the control plane and data plane are protected against the most common layer 3 and 4 DDoS attacks by https://cloud.google.com/armor/docs/advanced-network-ddos[Google Cloud Armor Standard^], with no latency impact.

* *VPC peering*
+
VPC peering against Redpanda Cloud networks allows users to connect to private clusters without traversing the public internet. You can establish VPC peering connections between two VPCs with non-overlapping network addresses. When creating a network intended for peering, ensure that the specified network address range does not overlap with the network address range of the destination VPC.
+
_Security best practice:_ When using VPC peering, always reject all network traffic initiated from a Redpanda Cloud network and only accept traffic from trusted connectors.

* *GCP Private Service Connect*
+
GCP Private Service Connect lets you connect to cluster services using a unidirectional TCP connection that can only be initiated by client applications. These applications can run from multiple customer-managed VPCs, even if their CIDR ranges overlap with the Redpanda cluster VPC. 
+
Redpanda configures a Private Service Connect producer against the cluster's network load balancer. All client connections to the Redpanda cluster services pass through this load balancer. You configure a Private Service Connect publisher with the Redpanda Cloud UI or the Cloud API. It is protected during creation by a consumer accept list of GCP networks or project IDs. Only those consumers can create consumer endpoints to the Redpanda cluster's Private Service Connect published service.
--
====

== Suggested reading

* xref:get-started:cloud-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud overview]
* xref:get-started:byoc-arch.adoc[BYOC architecture]
* xref:networking:byoc/index.adoc[BYOC networking]
* xref:networking:dedicated/index.adoc[Dedicated networking]
