modules/networking/pages/configure-private-service-connect-in-cloud-ui.adoc, before:

= Configure GCP Private Service Connect in the Cloud UI
:description: Set up GCP Private Service Connect in the Redpanda Cloud UI.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/configure-private-service-connect-in-cloud-ui.adoc

include::shared:partial$feature-flag.adoc[]

NOTE: This guide is for configuring GCP Private Service Connect using the Redpanda Cloud UI. To configure and manage Private Service on an existing public cluster, you must use the xref:networking:gcp-private-service-connect.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API].

The Redpanda GCP Private Service Connect service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own VPC. Traffic over Private Service Connect does not go through the public internet because these connections are treated as their own private GCP service. While your VPC has access to the Redpanda VPC, Redpanda cannot access your VPC.

Consider using the endpoint services if you have multiple VPCs and could benefit from a more simplified approach to network management:

* Private Service Connect allows overlapping xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR ranges] in VPC networks.
* Private Service Connect does not limit the number of connections using the service.
* You control which GCP projects are allowed to connect to the service.

== Requirements

* Use the https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install[gcloud^] command-line interface (CLI) to create the consumer-side resources, such as a client VPC and forwarding rule, or to modify existing resources to use the Private Service Connect service attachment created for your cluster.
* The client VPC must be in the same region as your Redpanda cluster.

== Enable endpoint service for existing clusters

. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, open your https://cloud.redpanda.com/clusters[cluster^], and click **Cluster settings**.
. Under Private Service Connect, click **Enable**. 
. For xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc[BYOVPC clusters], you need a NAT subnet with `purpose` set to `PRIVATE_SERVICE_CONNECT`. You also need to create VPC firewall rules to allow Private Service Connect traffic. You can use the `gcloud` CLI:
+
NOTE: The firewall rules support up to 20 Redpanda brokers. If you have more than 20 brokers, or for help enabling Private Service Connect, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda support^].
+
[,bash]
----
gcloud compute networks subnets create <subnet-name> \
    --project=<host-project-id> \
    --network=<shared-vpc-name> \
    --region=<region> \
    --range=<subnet-range> \
    --purpose=PRIVATE_SERVICE_CONNECT
----
+
[,bash]
----
gcloud compute firewall-rules create redpanda-psc \
  --description="Allow access to Redpanda PSC endpoints" \
  --network="<shared-vpc-name>" \
  --project="<host-project-id>" \
  --direction="INGRESS" \
  --target-tags="redpanda-node" \
  --source-ranges="10.0.0.0/8,172.16.0.0/12,192.168.0.0/16,100.64.0.0/10" \
  --allow="tcp:30181,tcp:30282,tcp:30292,tcp:31004,tcp:31082-31101,tcp:31182-31201,tcp:31282-31301,tcp:32092-32111,tcp:32192-32211,tcp:32292-32311"
----
+
Provide your values for the following placeholders:
+
- `<subnet-name>`: The name of the NAT subnet.
- `<host-project-id>`: The host GCP project ID.
- `<shared-vpc-name>`: The name of the VPC being used for your Redpanda Cloud cluster.
- `<region>`: The region of the Redpanda Cloud cluster.
- `<subnet-range>`: The CIDR range of the subnet. The mask should be at least `/29`. Each Private Service Connect connection takes up one IP address from the NAT subnet, so the CIDR must be able to accommodate all projects from which connections to the service attachment will be issued.
+
See the GCP documentation for https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/configure-private-service-connect-producer#add-subnet-psc[creating a subnet for Private Service Connect^]. 
. For the accepted consumers list, you need the GCP project IDs from which incoming connections will be accepted.
. It may take several minutes for your cluster to update. When the update is complete, the Private Service Connect status in **Cluster settings** changes from **In progress** to **Enabled**.

=== Deploy consumer-side resources

For each VPC network, you must complete the following steps to successfully connect to the service and use Kafka API and other Redpanda services such as HTTP Proxy.

. In **Cluster settings**, copy the **Service attachment URL** under **Private Service Connect**. Use this URL to create the Private Service Connect endpoint in GCP. 

. Create a private DNS zone. Use the cluster **DNS zone** value as the DNS name. 
+
[,bash]
----
gcloud dns --project=<gcp-project-id> managed-zones create <dns-zone-name> --description="<description>" --dns-name="<dns-zone-from-the-ui>" --visibility="private" --networks="<list-of-fully-qualified-names-of-networks-where-the-dns-zone-will-be-visible>"
----

. In the newly-created DNS zone, create a wildcard DNS record using the cluster **DNS record** value. 
+
[,bash]
----
gcloud dns --project=<gcp-project-id> record-sets create '*.<dns-zone-from-the-ui>' --zone="<dns-zone-name>" --type="A" --ttl="300" --rrdatas="<psc-endpoint-ip>"
----

. Confirm that your GCP VPC firewall allows traffic to and from the Private Service Connect forwarding rule IP address, on the expected ports.

== Access Redpanda services through VPC endpoint

After you have enabled Private Service Connect for your cluster, your connection URLs are available in the *How to Connect* section of the cluster overview in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

include::networking:partial$private-links-access-rp-services-through-vpc.adoc[]

== Test the connection

You can test the connection to the endpoint service from any VM or container in the consumer VPC. If configuring a client isn't possible right away, you can do these checks using `rpk` or cURL:

include::networking:partial$private-links-test-connection.adoc[]

== Disable endpoint service

In **Cluster settings**, click **Disable**. Existing connections are closed after GCP Private Service Connect is disabled. To connect using Private Service Connect again, you must re-enable the service.

Commit message:

Add to what's new & link to support

modules/networking/pages/configure-private-service-connect-in-cloud-ui.adoc, after:

= Configure GCP Private Service Connect in the Cloud UI
:description: Set up GCP Private Service Connect in the Redpanda Cloud UI.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/configure-private-service-connect-in-cloud-ui.adoc

include::shared:partial$feature-flag.adoc[]

[NOTE]
====

* This guide is for configuring GCP Private Service Connect using the Redpanda Cloud UI. To configure and manage Private Service on an existing public cluster, you must use the xref:networking:gcp-private-service-connect.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API].
* As of Februrary 2025, the Redpanda GCP Private Service Connect service supports AZ affinity. This allows requests from Private Service Connect endpoints to stay within the same AZ, avoiding additional networking costs. To upgrade, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda Support^].
==== 



The Redpanda GCP Private Service Connect service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own VPC. Traffic over Private Service Connect does not go through the public internet because these connections are treated as their own private GCP service. While your VPC has access to the Redpanda VPC, Redpanda cannot access your VPC.

Consider using the endpoint services if you have multiple VPCs and could benefit from a more simplified approach to network management:

* Private Service Connect allows overlapping xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR ranges] in VPC networks.
* Private Service Connect does not limit the number of connections using the service.
* You control which GCP projects are allowed to connect to the service.

== Requirements

* Use the https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install[gcloud^] command-line interface (CLI) to create the consumer-side resources, such as a client VPC and forwarding rule, or to modify existing resources to use the Private Service Connect service attachment created for your cluster.
* The client VPC must be in the same region as your Redpanda cluster.

== Enable endpoint service for existing clusters

. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, open your https://cloud.redpanda.com/clusters[cluster^], and click **Cluster settings**.
. Under Private Service Connect, click **Enable**. 
. For xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc[BYOVPC clusters], you need a NAT subnet with `purpose` set to `PRIVATE_SERVICE_CONNECT`. You also need to create VPC firewall rules to allow Private Service Connect traffic. You can use the `gcloud` CLI:
+
NOTE: The firewall rules support up to 20 Redpanda brokers. If you have more than 20 brokers, or for help enabling Private Service Connect, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda support^].
+
[,bash]
----
gcloud compute networks subnets create <subnet-name> \
    --project=<host-project-id> \
    --network=<shared-vpc-name> \
    --region=<region> \
    --range=<subnet-range> \
    --purpose=PRIVATE_SERVICE_CONNECT
----
+
[,bash]
----
gcloud compute firewall-rules create redpanda-psc \
  --description="Allow access to Redpanda PSC endpoints" \
  --network="<shared-vpc-name>" \
  --project="<host-project-id>" \
  --direction="INGRESS" \
  --target-tags="redpanda-node" \
  --source-ranges="10.0.0.0/8,172.16.0.0/12,192.168.0.0/16,100.64.0.0/10" \
  --allow="tcp:30181,tcp:30282,tcp:30292,tcp:31004,tcp:31082-31101,tcp:31182-31201,tcp:31282-31301,tcp:32092-32111,tcp:32192-32211,tcp:32292-32311"
----
+
Provide your values for the following placeholders:
+
- `<subnet-name>`: The name of the NAT subnet.
- `<host-project-id>`: The host GCP project ID.
- `<shared-vpc-name>`: The name of the VPC being used for your Redpanda Cloud cluster.
- `<region>`: The region of the Redpanda Cloud cluster.
- `<subnet-range>`: The CIDR range of the subnet. The mask should be at least `/29`. Each Private Service Connect connection takes up one IP address from the NAT subnet, so the CIDR must be able to accommodate all projects from which connections to the service attachment will be issued.
+
See the GCP documentation for https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/configure-private-service-connect-producer#add-subnet-psc[creating a subnet for Private Service Connect^]. 
. For the accepted consumers list, you need the GCP project IDs from which incoming connections will be accepted.
. It may take several minutes for your cluster to update. When the update is complete, the Private Service Connect status in **Cluster settings** changes from **In progress** to **Enabled**.

=== Deploy consumer-side resources

For each VPC network, you must complete the following steps to successfully connect to the service and use Kafka API and other Redpanda services such as HTTP Proxy.

. In **Cluster settings**, copy the **Service attachment URL** under **Private Service Connect**. Use this URL to create the Private Service Connect endpoint in GCP. 

. Create a private DNS zone. Use the cluster **DNS zone** value as the DNS name. 
+
[,bash]
----
gcloud dns --project=<gcp-project-id> managed-zones create <dns-zone-name> --description="<description>" --dns-name="<dns-zone-from-the-ui>" --visibility="private" --networks="<list-of-fully-qualified-names-of-networks-where-the-dns-zone-will-be-visible>"
----

. In the newly-created DNS zone, create a wildcard DNS record using the cluster **DNS record** value. 
+
[,bash]
----
gcloud dns --project=<gcp-project-id> record-sets create '*.<dns-zone-from-the-ui>' --zone="<dns-zone-name>" --type="A" --ttl="300" --rrdatas="<psc-endpoint-ip>"
----

. Confirm that your GCP VPC firewall allows traffic to and from the Private Service Connect forwarding rule IP address, on the expected ports.

== Access Redpanda services through VPC endpoint

After you have enabled Private Service Connect for your cluster, your connection URLs are available in the *How to Connect* section of the cluster overview in the Redpanda Cloud UI.

include::networking:partial$private-links-access-rp-services-through-vpc.adoc[]

== Test the connection

You can test the connection to the endpoint service from any VM or container in the consumer VPC. If configuring a client isn't possible right away, you can do these checks using `rpk` or cURL:

include::networking:partial$private-links-test-connection.adoc[]

== Disable endpoint service

In **Cluster settings**, click **Disable**. Existing connections are closed after GCP Private Service Connect is disabled. To connect using Private Service Connect again, you must re-enable the service.
