modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/serverless.adoc, before:

= Serverless
:description: Learn how to create a Serverless cluster and start streaming.
:page-aliases: get-started:cluster-types/serverless-pro.adoc, ROOT:deploy:deployment-option/cloud/serverless.adoc 


Serverless is the fastest and easiest way to start data streaming. With Serverless clusters, you host your data in Redpanda's VPC, and Redpanda handles automatic scaling, provisioning, operations, and maintenance. This is a production-ready deployment option with a cluster available instantly, and with pay-as-you-go billing, you only pay for what you consume. You can view detailed billing activity for each cluster and edit payment methods on the *Billing* page.

NOTE: Serverless is currently in a limited availability (LA) release. During LA, existing clusters can scale to the usage limits, but new clusters may need to wait for availability.

== Prerequisites

Make sure you have the latest version of `rpk`. See xref:get-started:rpk-install.adoc[].

== Serverless usage limits

Each Serverless cluster can handle:

* **Ingress**: 100 MB/s
* **Egress**: 300 MB/s
* **Partitions**: 5,000 
* **Message size**: 20 MB
* **Retention**: unlimited
* **Storage**: unlimited
* **Users**: 30
* **ACLs**: 120
* **Consumer groups**: 200
* **Connections**: 10,000 


NOTE: The partition limit is the number of logical partitions before replication occurs. Redpanda Cloud uses a replication factor of 3.

== Get started with Serverless

include::get-started:partial$get-started-serverless.adoc[]

== Explore your trial cluster

After you start a trial, Redpanda instantly prepares an account for you. Your account includes a `welcome` cluster with a `hello-world` demo topic you can explore. It includes sample data so you can see how real-time messaging works before sending your own data.

Follow the steps in the UI to use `rpk` to interact with your cluster from the command line:

. Log in:
+
```
rpk cloud login
```

. Consume from the `hello-world` topic:
+
```
rpk topic consume hello-world
```

In the https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud UI^], you can navigate to the *Topics* page and open the `hello-world` topic to see the included messages. Under the *Actions* dropdown, you can produce messages to it. Add team members and grant them access with ACLs on the *Security* page. 

== Create a Serverless cluster

To create a Serverless cluster: 

. In the https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud UI^], on the **Clusters** page, click **Create cluster**, then click **Create Serverless cluster**. 

. Enter a cluster name, then select the resource group. If you don't have an existing resource group, you can create one. Refresh the page to see newly-created resource groups. 
+
Serverless clusters are available in the AWS regions listed in xref:reference:tiers/serverless-regions.adoc[Serverless regions]. Redpanda expects your applications to be deployed in the same AWS region. For best performance, select the region closest to your applications. Serverless is not guaranteed to be pinned to a particular availability zone within that region.

. Go to the *Topics* page to create a topic. Under the *Actions* dropdown, you can produce messages to it. Add team members and grant them access with ACLs on the *Security* page. 

== Connect with your cluster

Create a Kafka client to interact with your cluster. The *Overview* page lists your bootstrap server URL and security settings in the *How to connect - Kafka API* tab. 

Or, Redpanda can generate a sample application to interact with your cluster. Run xref:reference:rpk/rpk-generate/rpk-generate-app.adoc[`rpk generate app`], and select your preferred programming language. Follow the commands in the terminal to run the application, create a demo topic, produce to the topic, and consume the data back.

Follow the steps in the UI to use `rpk` to interact with your cluster from the command line. Here are some helpful  commands:

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-cloud/rpk-cloud-login.adoc[`rpk cloud login`]: Use this to log in to Redpanda Cloud or to refresh the session.
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-topic.adoc[`rpk topic`]: Use this to manage topics, produce data, and consume data. 
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-profile/rpk-profile-print.adoc[`rpk profile print`]: Use this to view your `rpk` configuration and see the URL for your Serverless cluster.
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-security/rpk-security-user.adoc[`rpk security user`]: Use this to manage users and permissions. 

NOTE: Redpanda Serverless is opinionated about Kafka configurations. For example, automatic topic creation is disabled. Some systems expect the Kafka service to automatically create topics when a message is produced to a topic that doesn't exist. Create topics on the *Topics* page or with `rpk topic create`.

== Supported features

* Redpanda Serverless supports the Kafka API. Serverless clusters work with all Kafka clients. See xref:develop:kafka-clients.adoc[].
* Serverless clusters support all major Apache Kafka messages for managing topics, producing/consuming data (including transactions), managing groups, managing offsets, and managing ACLs. (User management is available in the Redpanda Cloud UI or with `rpk security acl`.) 
* Use xref:develop:connect/about.adoc[Redpanda Connect] to quickly build and deploy streaming data pipelines or AI applications. 

=== Unsupported features

Not all features included in BYOC clusters are available in Serverless. For example, the following features are not supported:

* HTTP Proxy API
* Ability to export metrics to a third-party monitoring system
* Private networking (VPC peering or AWS PrivateLink)
* Multiple availability zones (AZs)
* RBAC in the data plane and mTLS authentication for Kafka API clients
* Kafka Connect 

== Next steps

* xref:get-started:cloud-overview.adoc[Learn more about Redpanda Cloud]
* xref:get-started:config-topics.adoc[Manage topics]
* xref:billing:billing.adoc[Learn about billing]

Commit message:

DOC-1350 Document feature Serverless on GCP

modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/serverless.adoc, after:

= Serverless
:description: Learn how to create a Serverless cluster and start streaming.
:page-aliases: get-started:cluster-types/serverless-pro.adoc, ROOT:deploy:deployment-option/cloud/serverless.adoc 


Serverless is the fastest and easiest way to start data streaming. With Serverless clusters, you host your data in Redpanda's VPC, and Redpanda handles automatic scaling, provisioning, operations, and maintenance. This is a production-ready deployment option with a cluster available instantly, and you only pay for what you consume. You can view detailed billing activity for each cluster and edit payment methods on the *Billing* page.

[NOTE]
====
* Serverless on AWS is currently in a limited availability (LA) release. During LA, existing clusters can scale to the usage limits, but new clusters may need to wait for availability. 
* Serverless on GCP is currently in a beta release. Features in beta are available for testing and feedback. They are not covered by Redpanda Support and should not be used in production environments. To unlock this feature, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda Support^].

====

== Prerequisites

Make sure you have the latest version of `rpk`. See xref:get-started:rpk-install.adoc[].

== Serverless usage limits

Each Serverless cluster can handle:

* **Ingress**: 100 MB/s
* **Egress**: 300 MB/s
* **Partitions**: 5,000 
* **Message size**: 20 MB
* **Retention**: unlimited
* **Storage**: unlimited
* **Users**: 30
* **ACLs**: 120
* **Consumer groups**: 200
* **Connections**: 10,000 


NOTE: The partition limit is the number of logical partitions before replication occurs. Redpanda Cloud uses a replication factor of 3.

== Get started with Serverless

include::get-started:partial$get-started-serverless.adoc[]

== Explore your trial cluster

After you start a trial, Redpanda instantly prepares an account for you. Your account includes a `welcome` cluster with a `hello-world` demo topic you can explore. It includes sample data so you can see how real-time messaging works before sending your own data.

Follow the steps in the UI to use `rpk` to interact with your cluster from the command line:

. Log in:
+
```
rpk cloud login
```

. Consume from the `hello-world` topic:
+
```
rpk topic consume hello-world
```

In the https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud UI^], you can navigate to the *Topics* page and open the `hello-world` topic to see the included messages. Under the *Actions* dropdown, you can produce messages to it. Add team members and grant them access with ACLs on the *Security* page. 

== Create a Serverless cluster

To create a Serverless cluster: 

. In the https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud UI^], on the **Clusters** page, click **Create cluster**, then click **Create Serverless cluster**. 

. Enter a cluster name, then select the resource group. If you don't have an existing resource group, you can create one. Refresh the page to see newly-created resource groups. 
+
Serverless clusters are available in the regions listed in xref:reference:tiers/serverless-regions.adoc[Serverless regions]. Redpanda expects your applications to be deployed in the same region. For best performance, select the region closest to your applications. Serverless is not guaranteed to be pinned to a particular availability zone within that region.

. Go to the *Topics* page to create a topic. Under the *Actions* dropdown, you can produce messages to it. Add team members and grant them access with ACLs on the *Security* page. 

After you create a Serverless cluster, you are guided to use xref:develop:connect/about.adoc[Redpanda Connect] to quickly build and deploy streaming data pipelines or AI applications. 

=== Create a streaming pipeline

TO-DO

== Connect with your cluster

Create a Kafka client to interact with your cluster. The *Overview* page lists your bootstrap server URL and security settings in the *How to connect - Kafka API* tab. 

Or, Redpanda can generate a sample application to interact with your cluster. Run xref:reference:rpk/rpk-generate/rpk-generate-app.adoc[`rpk generate app`], and select your preferred programming language. Follow the commands in the terminal to run the application, create a demo topic, produce to the topic, and consume the data back.

Follow the steps in the UI to use `rpk` to interact with your cluster from the command line. Here are some helpful  commands:

* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-cloud/rpk-cloud-login.adoc[`rpk cloud login`]: Use this to log in to Redpanda Cloud or to refresh the session.
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-topic.adoc[`rpk topic`]: Use this to manage topics, produce data, and consume data. 
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-profile/rpk-profile-print.adoc[`rpk profile print`]: Use this to view your `rpk` configuration and see the URL for your Serverless cluster.
* xref:reference:rpk/rpk-security/rpk-security-user.adoc[`rpk security user`]: Use this to manage users and permissions. 

NOTE: Redpanda Serverless is opinionated about Kafka configurations. For example, automatic topic creation is disabled. Some systems expect the Kafka service to automatically create topics when a message is produced to a topic that doesn't exist. Create topics on the *Topics* page or with `rpk topic create`.

== Supported features

* Redpanda Serverless supports the Kafka API. Serverless clusters work with all Kafka clients. See xref:develop:kafka-clients.adoc[].
* Serverless clusters support all major Apache Kafka messages for managing topics, producing/consuming data (including transactions), managing groups, managing offsets, and managing ACLs. (User management is available in the Redpanda Cloud UI or with `rpk security acl`.) 

=== Unsupported features

Not all features included in BYOC clusters are available in Serverless. For example, the following features are not supported:

* HTTP Proxy API
* Ability to export metrics to a third-party monitoring system
* Private networking (VPC peering or AWS PrivateLink)
* Multiple availability zones (AZs)
* RBAC in the data plane and mTLS authentication for Kafka API clients
* Kafka Connect 

== Next steps

* xref:get-started:cloud-overview.adoc[Learn more about Redpanda Cloud]
* xref:get-started:config-topics.adoc[Manage topics]
* xref:billing:billing.adoc[Learn about billing]
