modules/security/pages/authorization/cloud-authorization.adoc, before:

= Authorization
:description: Learn about user authorization and agent authorization in Redpanda Cloud.
:page-cloud: true

There are two types of authorization in Redpanda Cloud:

* User authorization
+
User authorizations, managed by Kafka glossterm:ACL[,access control lists (ACLs)],
grant users permission to perform specific types of operations on specific
resources (such as topics, groups, clusters, or transactional IDs).

* Agent authorization
+
When deploying an agent as part of BYOC cluster
provisioning, Redpanda Cloud automatically assigns xref:security:authorization/cloud-iam-policies.adoc[IAM policies] to that agent.
The IAM policy permissions granted to the agent provide it the authorization
required to fully manage Redpanda Cloud clusters in AWS or GCP. For more information, see xref:get-started:cloud-overview.adoc#byoc-architecture[BYOC architecture].
+
IMPORTANT: IAM policies do not apply or act as deployment permissions, and there are no
explicit user actions associated with IAM policies. Rather, IAM policy
permissions apply to Redpanda Cloud agents _only_, and serve to provide Redpanda
agents access to AWS and GCP clusters so Redpanda brokers can communicate
with them.

Commit message:

finalize cloud-docs (#7)
* 2611 finalize cloud-docs

* move rrr under byoc

* move partner integrations up to a top level

* fix link

* Add page aliases

* Update local-antora-playbook.yml

* Update local-antora-playbook.yml

* Rename cloud component (#5)

* Rename cloud component

* Update landing page

* Update home page

* update home

* Update antora.yml

* Update antora.yml

* copy Serverless API PR

* copy new regions from 636

* fix links from new regions

* copy over AWS marketplace PR 612

* copy over Azure PR 597

* Apply suggestions from code review

* remove me-central-1 region

* fix links

* fix link

* fix links

* update azure

* fix azure

* fix spacing

* fix rpk command description

* add oxford comma

* azure updates

* Apply suggestions from code review

* Update create-byoc-cluster-azure.adoc

* Update cloud-iam-policies-azure.adoc

* Update index.adoc

* Update cloud-dedicated-controlplane-api.adoc

* Update cloud-serverless-controlplane-api.adoc

---------

Co-authored-by: JakeSCahill <jake@redpanda.com>
Co-authored-by: Jake Cahill <45230295+JakeSCahill@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Paulo Borges <paulohtb@hotmail.com>

modules/security/pages/authorization/cloud-authorization.adoc, after:

= Authorization
:description: Learn about user authorization and agent authorization in Redpanda Cloud.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/security/authorization/cloud-authorization.adoc

There are two types of authorization in Redpanda Cloud:

* User authorization
+
User authorizations, managed by Kafka glossterm:ACL[,access control lists (ACLs)],
grant users permission to perform specific types of operations on specific
resources (such as topics, groups, clusters, or transactional IDs).

* Agent authorization
+
When deploying an agent as part of BYOC cluster
provisioning, Redpanda Cloud automatically assigns xref:security:authorization/cloud-iam-policies.adoc[IAM policies] to that agent.
The IAM policy permissions granted to the agent provide it the authorization
required to fully manage Redpanda Cloud clusters in AWS, GCP, or Azure. For more information, see xref:get-started:cloud-overview.adoc#byoc-architecture[BYOC architecture].
+
IMPORTANT: IAM policies do not apply or act as deployment permissions, and there are no
explicit user actions associated with IAM policies. Rather, IAM policy
permissions apply to Redpanda Cloud agents _only_, and serve to provide Redpanda
agents access to AWS, GCP, or Azure clusters so Redpanda brokers can communicate
with them.
