modules/networking/pages/serverless/aws/privatelink-ui.adoc, before:

= Configure AWS PrivateLink in the Cloud Console
:description: Set up AWS PrivateLink in the Redpanda Cloud Console for Serverless clusters.

The Redpanda AWS PrivateLink endpoint service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own VPC. Traffic over PrivateLink does not go through the public internet because these connections are treated as their own private AWS service. While your VPC has access to the Redpanda VPC, Redpanda cannot access your VPC.

Consider using the endpoint service if you have multiple VPCs and could benefit from a more simplified approach to network management.

You can create a new Serverless cluster with PrivateLink enabled, or enable PrivateLink for existing clusters using either the Console or the API.

[NOTE]
====
* Each client VPC can have one endpoint connected to the PrivateLink service.
* PrivateLink allows overlapping xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR ranges] in VPC networks.
* PrivateLink does not add extra connection limits. However, VPC peering is limited to 125 connections. See https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink/faqs/[How scalable is AWS PrivateLink?^]
* You control which AWS principals are allowed to connect to the endpoint service.
====

== Requirements

* Your Redpanda Serverless cluster and VPC must be in the same region.
* Use the https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-getting-started.html[AWS CLI] to create a new client VPC or modify an existing one to use the PrivateLink endpoint.

TIP: In Kafka clients, set `connections.max.idle.ms` to a value less than 350 seconds.

== DNS resolution with PrivateLink

PrivateLink changes how DNS resolution works for your cluster. When you query cluster hostnames outside the VPC that contains your PrivateLink endpoint, DNS may return private IP addresses that aren't reachable from your location.

To resolve cluster hostnames from other VPCs or on-premise networks, set up DNS forwarding using Route 53 Resolver:

. In the VPC that contains your PrivateLink endpoint, create a Route 53 Resolver inbound endpoint.
+
Ensure that the inbound endpoint's security group allows inbound UDP/TCP port 53 from each VPC or on-prem network that will forward queries.

. In each other VPC that must resolve the cluster domain, create a Resolver outbound endpoint and a forwarding rule for `<cluster_domain>` that targets the inbound endpoint IPs from the previous step. Associate the rule to those VPCs.
+
The cluster domain is the suffix after the seed hostname. For example, if your bootstrap server URL is: `cki01qgth38kk81ard3g.any.us-east-1.aw.priv.prd.cloud.redpanda.com:9092`, then `cluster_domain` is: `cki01qgth38kk81ard3g.any.us-east-1.aw.priv.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`.
. For on-premises DNS, create a conditional forwarder for `<cluster_domain>` that forwards to the inbound endpoint IPs from the earlier step (over VPN/Direct Connect).
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Do not configure forwarding rules to target the VPC's Amazon-provided DNS resolver (VPC base CIDR + 2). Rules must target the IP addresses of Route 53 Resolver endpoints.
====

== Enable endpoint service for existing clusters

. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, select your https://cloud.redpanda.com/clusters[cluster^], and go to the *Cluster settings* page.
. Under Networking, select **Private Access** and then select an existing private link.

NOTE: For help with issues when enabling PrivateLink, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda support^].

== Access Redpanda services through VPC endpoint

After you have enabled PrivateLink for your cluster, your connection URLs are available in the *How to Connect* section of the cluster overview in the Redpanda Cloud Console.

include::networking:partial$private-links-access-rp-service-serverless.adoc[]

== Test the connection

You can test the connection to the endpoint service from any VM or container in the consumer VPC. If configuring a client isn't possible right away, you can do these checks using `rpk` or cURL:

include::networking:partial$private-links-test-connection-serverless.adoc[]

== Disable endpoint service

On the Cluster Settings page, deselect **Private Access**. Existing connections are closed after the AWS PrivateLink service is disabled.

NOTE: Disabling private access in Redpanda Cloud does not delete the PrivateLink endpoint in your AWS account or the PrivateLink resource in Redpanda Cloud. Both remain provisioned and continue to incur charges until you explicitly delete them.


include::shared:partial$suggested-reading.adoc[]

* xref:networking:serverless/aws/privatelink-api.adoc[]

Commit message:

add prereq to create PL on Networking if necessary

modules/networking/pages/serverless/aws/privatelink-ui.adoc, after:

= Configure AWS PrivateLink in the Cloud Console
:description: Set up AWS PrivateLink in the Redpanda Cloud Console for Serverless clusters.

The Redpanda AWS PrivateLink endpoint service provides secure access to Redpanda Cloud from your own VPC. Traffic over PrivateLink does not go through the public internet because these connections are treated as their own private AWS service. While your VPC has access to the Redpanda VPC, Redpanda cannot access your VPC.

Consider using the endpoint service if you have multiple VPCs and could benefit from a more simplified approach to network management.

You can create a new Serverless cluster with PrivateLink enabled, or enable PrivateLink for existing clusters using either the Console or the API.

[NOTE]
====
* Each client VPC can have one endpoint connected to the PrivateLink service.
* PrivateLink allows overlapping xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR ranges] in VPC networks.
* PrivateLink does not add extra connection limits. However, VPC peering is limited to 125 connections. See https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink/faqs/[How scalable is AWS PrivateLink?^]
* You control which AWS principals are allowed to connect to the endpoint service.
====

== Requirements

* Your Redpanda Serverless cluster and VPC must be in the same region.
* Use the https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-getting-started.html[AWS CLI] to create a new client VPC or modify an existing one to use the PrivateLink endpoint.

TIP: In Kafka clients, set `connections.max.idle.ms` to a value less than 350 seconds.

== DNS resolution with PrivateLink

PrivateLink changes how DNS resolution works for your cluster. When you query cluster hostnames outside the VPC that contains your PrivateLink endpoint, DNS may return private IP addresses that aren't reachable from your location.

To resolve cluster hostnames from other VPCs or on-premise networks, set up DNS forwarding using Route 53 Resolver:

. In the VPC that contains your PrivateLink endpoint, create a Route 53 Resolver inbound endpoint.
+
Ensure that the inbound endpoint's security group allows inbound UDP/TCP port 53 from each VPC or on-prem network that will forward queries.

. In each other VPC that must resolve the cluster domain, create a Resolver outbound endpoint and a forwarding rule for `<cluster_domain>` that targets the inbound endpoint IPs from the previous step. Associate the rule to those VPCs.
+
The cluster domain is the suffix after the seed hostname. For example, if your bootstrap server URL is: `cki01qgth38kk81ard3g.any.us-east-1.aw.priv.prd.cloud.redpanda.com:9092`, then `cluster_domain` is: `cki01qgth38kk81ard3g.any.us-east-1.aw.priv.prd.cloud.redpanda.com`.
. For on-premises DNS, create a conditional forwarder for `<cluster_domain>` that forwards to the inbound endpoint IPs from the earlier step (over VPN/Direct Connect).
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Do not configure forwarding rules to target the VPC's Amazon-provided DNS resolver (VPC base CIDR + 2). Rules must target the IP addresses of Route 53 Resolver endpoints.
====

== Enable endpoint service for existing clusters

If you do not already have a PrivateLink resource for your cluster's resource group and region, create one at the organization level on the *Networking* page. For Serverless clusters, click **Create private link**.

. Select your https://cloud.redpanda.com/clusters[cluster^], and go to the *Cluster settings* page.
. Under Networking, select **Private Access** and then select an existing private link.

NOTE: For help with issues enabling PrivateLink, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda support^].

== Access Redpanda services through VPC endpoint

After you have enabled PrivateLink for your cluster, your connection URLs are available in the *How to Connect* section of the cluster overview in the Redpanda Cloud Console.

include::networking:partial$private-links-access-rp-service-serverless.adoc[]

== Test the connection

You can test the connection to the endpoint service from any VM or container in the consumer VPC. If configuring a client isn't possible right away, you can do these checks using `rpk` or cURL:

include::networking:partial$private-links-test-connection-serverless.adoc[]

== Disable endpoint service

On the Cluster Settings page, deselect **Private Access**. Existing connections are closed after the AWS PrivateLink service is disabled.

NOTE: Disabling private access in Redpanda Cloud does not delete the PrivateLink endpoint in your AWS account or the PrivateLink resource in Redpanda Cloud. Both remain provisioned and continue to incur charges until you explicitly delete them.


include::shared:partial$suggested-reading.adoc[]

* xref:networking:serverless/aws/privatelink-api.adoc[]
