modules/networking/pages/dedicated/gcp/vpc-peering-gcp.adoc, before:

= Add a Dedicated VPC Peering Connection
:description: Use the Redpanda Cloud UI to set up VPC peering.

A VPC peering connection is a networking connection between two VPCs. This connection allows the VPCs to communicate with each other as if they were within the same network. A route table routes traffic between the two VPCs using private IPv4 addresses.

NOTE: Traffic is _not_ routed over the public internet.

When you select a network for deploying your Redpanda Dedicated cluster, you have the option to select a private connection with VPC peering. The VPC peering connection connects your VPC to the Redpanda Cloud VPC.

== Prerequisites

* *VPC network*:Before setting up a peering connection in the Redpanda Cloud UI, you must have a VPC in your own account for Redpanda's VPC to connect to. 
* *Matching region*: VPC peering connections can only be established between networks created in the *same region*. Redpanda Cloud does not support inter-region VPC peering connections.
* *Non-overlapping CIDR blocks*: The CIDR block for your VPC network cannot match or overlap with the CIDR block for the Redpanda Cloud VPC.

TIP: Consider adding `rp` at the beginning of the VPC name to indicate that this VPC is for deploying a Redpanda cluster.

== Create a peering connection

To create a peering connection between your VPC and Redpanda's VPC:

. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to the *Overview* page for your cluster.
. In the Details section, click the name of the Redpanda network.
. On the *Network* page, click *+ Add peering connection*.
. In *Connection name*, enter a name for the connection.
+
For example, the name might refer to the VPC ID of the VPC you created in GCP.

. In *GCP account number*, enter the account number associated with the VPC you want to connect to.
. In *GCP VPC ID*, enter the VPC ID.
. Click *Create peering connection*.

== Accept the peering connection request

Redpanda sends a peering request to the GCP. You must accept the request from the Redpanda VPC to set up the peering connection.

. Log in to GCP.
. Select the region where the VPC was created.
. From the navigation menu, select *Peering Connections*.
. Under *Requester VPC*, select the VPC you created for use with Redpanda.
+
The status should say "Pending acceptance".

. Open the *Actions* menu and select *Accept Request*.
. In the confirmation dialog box, verify that the requester owner ID corresponds to the Redpanda account, and select *Yes, Accept*.
. In the next confirmation dialog box, select *Modify my route tables now*.

include::networking:partial$switch-to-psc.adoc[]

Commit message:

separate links for byoc/dedicated

modules/networking/pages/dedicated/gcp/vpc-peering-gcp.adoc, after:

= Add a Dedicated VPC Peering Connection
:description: Use the Redpanda Cloud UI to set up VPC peering.

A VPC peering connection is a networking connection between two VPCs. This connection allows the VPCs to communicate with each other as if they were within the same network. A route table routes traffic between the two VPCs using private IPv4 addresses.

NOTE: Traffic is _not_ routed over the public internet.

When you select a network for deploying your Redpanda Dedicated cluster, you have the option to select a private connection with VPC peering. The VPC peering connection connects your VPC to the Redpanda Cloud VPC.

== Prerequisites

* *VPC network*:Before setting up a peering connection in the Redpanda Cloud UI, you must have a VPC in your own account for Redpanda's VPC to connect to. 
* *Matching region*: VPC peering connections can only be established between networks created in the *same region*. Redpanda Cloud does not support inter-region VPC peering connections.
* *Non-overlapping CIDR blocks*: The CIDR block for your VPC network cannot match or overlap with the CIDR block for the Redpanda Cloud VPC.

TIP: Consider adding `rp` at the beginning of the VPC name to indicate that this VPC is for deploying a Redpanda cluster.

== Create a peering connection

To create a peering connection between your VPC and Redpanda's VPC:

. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, go to the *Overview* page for your cluster.
. In the Details section, click the name of the Redpanda network.
. On the *Network* page, click *+ Add peering connection*.
. In *Connection name*, enter a name for the connection.
+
For example, the name might refer to the VPC ID of the VPC you created in GCP.

. In *GCP account number*, enter the account number associated with the VPC you want to connect to.
. In *GCP VPC ID*, enter the VPC ID.
. Click *Create peering connection*.

== Accept the peering connection request

Redpanda sends a peering request to the GCP. You must accept the request from the Redpanda VPC to set up the peering connection.

. Log in to GCP.
. Select the region where the VPC was created.
. From the navigation menu, select *Peering Connections*.
. Under *Requester VPC*, select the VPC you created for use with Redpanda.
+
The status should say "Pending acceptance".

. Open the *Actions* menu and select *Accept Request*.
. In the confirmation dialog box, verify that the requester owner ID corresponds to the Redpanda account, and select *Yes, Accept*.
. In the next confirmation dialog box, select *Modify my route tables now*.

== Switch from VPC peering to Private Service Connect

VPC peering and Private Service Connect use the same DNS hostnames (connection URLs) to connect to the Redpanda cluster. After you complete the Private Service Connect DNS configuration, those hostnames resolve to Private Service Connect endpoints, which can interrupt existing VPC peering-based connections if clients aren't ready.

To enable Private Service Connect without disrupting VPC peering connections, do a controlled DNS switchover:

. Enable Private Service Connect on the existing cluster.
. Deploy consumer-side resources, but do not create private DNS yet. See: xref:networking:dedicated/gcp/configure-psc-in-api.adoc#enable-private-service-connect-on-an-existing-cluster[Enable PSC on an existing cluster].
. During a planned window, create the private DNS zone and records in your VPC to switch the shared hostnames over to Private Service Connect.
