modules/manage/pages/cluster-maintenance/cluster-state.adoc, before:

= Cluster State
:description: Learn about the current status of a cluster.

The cluster state shows the current status of a cluster. Redpanda Cloud updates this state automatically, allowing you to monitor a cluster's health and availability.

[tabs]
=====
Serverless::
+
--
[cols="1,4",options="header"]
|===
|State |Description
|Creating |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state created.
|Placing |Cluster is in the process of being placed on a cell with sufficient resources in the data plane.
|Ready |Cluster is running and accepting external requests.
|Deleting |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state removed. Resources dedicated to the cluster in the data plane will be released.
|Failed |Cluster was unable to enter the ready state from either the Creating or Placing states.
|Suspended |Cluster is running but blocks all external requests.
|===
--
BYOC/Dedicated::
+
--
[cols="1,4",options="header"]
|===
|State |Description
|Creating agent |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state created, and the Redpanda Cloud agent is being deployed.  
|Creating |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state created.
|Ready |Cluster is running and accepting external requests.
|Deleting |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state removed. Resources dedicated to the cluster in the data plane are released.
|Deleting agent |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state removed, and the Redpanda Cloud agent is being removed. 
|Upgrading |Cluster is undergoing a rolling upgrade or a scale-up/scale-down operation.
|Failed |Cluster was unable to enter the Ready state from either the Creating or the Creating agent states.
|Suspended |Cluster is running but blocks all external requests.
|===
--
=====

Commit message:

Add cc to turn Suspended back to Ready state

modules/manage/pages/cluster-maintenance/cluster-state.adoc, after:

= Cluster State
:description: Learn about the current status of a cluster.

The cluster state shows the current status of a cluster. Redpanda Cloud updates this state automatically, allowing you to monitor a cluster's health and availability.

[tabs]
=====
Serverless::
+
--
[cols="1,4",options="header"]
|===
|State |Description
|Creating |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state created.
|Placing |Cluster is in the process of being placed on a cell with sufficient resources in the data plane.
|Ready |Cluster is running and accepting external requests.
|Deleting |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state removed. Resources dedicated to the cluster in the data plane will be released.
|Failed |Cluster was unable to enter the ready state from either the Creating or Placing states.
|Suspended |Cluster is running but blocks all external requests. +
This can happen when credits run out. Enter a credit card to return to the Ready state. 
|===
--
BYOC/Dedicated::
+
--
[cols="1,4",options="header"]
|===
|State |Description
|Creating agent |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state created, and the Redpanda Cloud agent is being deployed.  
|Creating |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state created.
|Ready |Cluster is running and accepting external requests.
|Deleting |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state removed. Resources dedicated to the cluster in the data plane are released.
|Deleting agent |Cluster is in the process of having its control plane state removed, and the Redpanda Cloud agent is being removed. 
|Upgrading |Cluster is undergoing a rolling upgrade or a scale-up/scale-down operation.
|Failed |Cluster was unable to enter the Ready state from either the Creating or the Creating agent states.
|Suspended |Cluster is running but blocks all external requests. +
This can happen when credits run out. Enter a credit card to return to the Ready state.
|===
--
=====
