modules/ai-agents/pages/mcp/remote/manage-servers.adoc, before:

= Manage Remote MCP Servers
:description: Learn how to edit, stop, start, and delete MCP servers in Redpanda Cloud.
:page-topic-type: how-to
:personas: platform_admin, ai_agent_developer
// Reader journey: "I operate and maintain"
// Learning objectives - what readers can accomplish from this page:
:learning-objective-1: Edit MCP server configurations
:learning-objective-2: Stop and start MCP servers
:learning-objective-3: Delete MCP servers safely

After creating an MCP server, you can manage its lifecycle, including editing configurations, pausing to save costs, and permanent deletion.

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== Prerequisites

You must have an existing MCP server. If you do not have one, see xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/quickstart.adoc[].

== Edit an MCP server

You can update the configuration, resources, or metadata of an MCP server at any time.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud Console::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Remote MCP*.
. Find the MCP server you want to edit and click its name.
. Click *Edit configuration*.
. Make your changes.
. Click *Save* to apply changes.

[NOTE]
====
Editing a running MCP server may cause a brief interruption. Review changes before deploying to production.
====
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
. link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Authenticate and get the base URL] for the Data Plane API.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_getmcpserver[`GET /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}`] to retrieve the current configuration.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_updatemcpserver[`PATCH /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}`] to update the configuration:
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X PATCH "https://<dataplane-api-url>/v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/<mcp-server-id>?update_mask=display_name,description" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "mcp_server": {
      "display_name": "updated-name",
      "description": "Updated description"
    }
  }'
----
--
=====

== Stop an MCP server

Stopping a server pauses all tool execution and releases compute resources, but preserves configuration and state. This is useful for temporarily disabling a server to save costs while retaining the ability to restart it later.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud Console::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Remote MCP*.
. Find the server you want to stop.
. Click the three dots and select *Stop*.
. Confirm the action.
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
. link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Authenticate and get the base URL] for the Data Plane API.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_stopmcpserver[`POST /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}:stop`]:
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "https://<dataplane-api-url>/v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/<mcp-server-id>:stop" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>"
----
--
=====

While stopped, the server cannot respond to MCP requests. Start it to restore service.

== Start a stopped MCP server

Resume a stopped server to restore its functionality.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud Console::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Remote MCP*.
. Find the stopped server.
. Click the three dots and select *Start*.
. Wait for the status to show *Running* before reconnecting clients.
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
. link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Authenticate and get the base URL] for the Data Plane API.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_startmcpserver[`POST /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}:start`]:
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "https://<dataplane-api-url>/v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/<mcp-server-id>:start" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>"
----
+
. Wait for the status to show *Running* before reconnecting clients.
--
=====

== Delete an MCP server

Deleting a server permanently removes it. You cannot undo this action. Redpanda removes all configuration, tools, and associated resources.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud Console::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Remote MCP*.
. Find the server you want to delete.
. Click the three dots and select *Delete*.
. Confirm the deletion when prompted.
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
. link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Authenticate and get the base URL] for the Data Plane API.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_deletemcpserver[`DELETE /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}`]:
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X DELETE "https://<dataplane-api-url>/v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/<mcp-server-id>" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>"
----
--
=====

[WARNING]
====
Deletion is immediate and permanent. Make sure you have backed up any important configuration before deleting an MCP server.
====

== Next steps

* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/scale-resources.adoc[Scale MCP server resources] to optimize performance and costs.
* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/monitor-activity.adoc[Monitor MCP server activity] using OpenTelemetry traces.
* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/best-practices.adoc[Learn best practices] for building robust tools.

Commit message:

Improve AI agents documentation readability and structure
- Fix period usage in numbered steps and bold labels across all AI agent docs
- Add descriptive link text to xref anchor links for better accessibility
- Redesign monitor-agents.adoc reducing lists from 9 to 2, converting to prose and tables
- Create observability index page
- Fix broken xref from billing.adoc to observability/concepts.adoc

modules/ai-agents/pages/mcp/remote/manage-servers.adoc, after:

= Manage Remote MCP Servers
:description: Learn how to edit, stop, start, and delete MCP servers in Redpanda Cloud.
:page-aliases: ai-agents:mcp/remote/admin-guide.adoc
:page-topic-type: how-to
:personas: platform_admin, ai_agent_developer
// Reader journey: "I operate and maintain"
// Learning objectives - what readers can accomplish from this page:
:learning-objective-1: Edit MCP server configurations
:learning-objective-2: Stop and start MCP servers
:learning-objective-3: Delete MCP servers safely

After creating an MCP server, you can manage its lifecycle, including editing configurations, pausing to save costs, and permanent deletion.

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== Prerequisites

You must have an existing MCP server. If you do not have one, see xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/quickstart.adoc[].

== Edit an MCP server

You can update the configuration, resources, or metadata of an MCP server at any time.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud Console::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Agentic AI* > *Remote MCP*.
. Find the MCP server you want to edit and click its name.
. Click *Edit configuration*.
. Make your changes.
. Click *Save* to apply changes.

[NOTE]
====
Editing a running MCP server may cause a brief interruption. Review changes before deploying to production.
====
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
. link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Authenticate and get the base URL] for the Data Plane API.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_getmcpserver[`GET /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}`] to retrieve the current configuration.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_updatemcpserver[`PATCH /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}`] to update the configuration:
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X PATCH "https://<dataplane-api-url>/v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/<mcp-server-id>?update_mask=display_name,description" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "mcp_server": {
      "display_name": "updated-name",
      "description": "Updated description"
    }
  }'
----
--
=====

== Stop an MCP server

Stopping a server pauses all tool execution and releases compute resources, but preserves configuration and state. This is useful for temporarily disabling a server to save costs while retaining the ability to restart it later.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud Console::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Agentic AI* > *Remote MCP*.
. Find the server you want to stop.
. Click the three dots and select *Stop*.
. Confirm the action.
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
. link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Authenticate and get the base URL] for the Data Plane API.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_stopmcpserver[`POST /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}:stop`]:
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "https://<dataplane-api-url>/v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/<mcp-server-id>:stop" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>"
----
--
=====

While stopped, the server cannot respond to MCP requests. Start it to restore service.

== Start a stopped MCP server

Resume a stopped server to restore its functionality.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud Console::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Agentic AI* > *Remote MCP*.
. Find the stopped server.
. Click the three dots and select *Start*.
. Wait for the status to show *Running* before reconnecting clients.
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
. link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Authenticate and get the base URL] for the Data Plane API.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_startmcpserver[`POST /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}:start`]:
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "https://<dataplane-api-url>/v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/<mcp-server-id>:start" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>"
----
+
. Wait for the status to show *Running* before reconnecting clients.
--
=====

== Delete an MCP server

Deleting a server permanently removes it. You cannot undo this action. Redpanda removes all configuration, tools, and associated resources.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud Console::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Agentic AI* > *Remote MCP*.
. Find the server you want to delete.
. Click the three dots and select *Delete*.
. Confirm the deletion when prompted.
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
. link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Authenticate and get the base URL] for the Data Plane API.
. Make a request to link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/operation/operation-mcpserverservice_deletemcpserver[`DELETE /v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/\{mcp_server_id}`]:
+
[,bash]
----
curl -X DELETE "https://<dataplane-api-url>/v1/redpanda-connect/mcp-servers/<mcp-server-id>" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>"
----
--
=====

[WARNING]
====
Deletion is immediate and permanent. Make sure you have backed up any important configuration before deleting an MCP server.
====

== Next steps

* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/scale-resources.adoc[Scale MCP server resources] to optimize performance and costs.
* xref:ai-agents:observability/monitor-mcp-servers.adoc[Monitor MCP server activity] using OpenTelemetry traces.
* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/best-practices.adoc[Learn best practices] for building robust tools.
