modules/ai-agents/pages/mcp/remote/monitor-activity.adoc, before:

= Monitor Remote MCP Server Activity
:description: Learn how to monitor Remote MCP servers using OpenTelemetry traces, track tool invocations, debug failures, and integrate with observability platforms.

Every Remote MCP server automatically emits OpenTelemetry traces to a topic called `redpanda.otel_traces`. These traces provide detailed observability into your MCP server's operations, including tool invocations, processing times, errors, and resource usage.

== Prerequisites

You must have an existing MCP server. If you do not have one, see xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/quickstart.adoc[].

== OpenTelemetry traces topic

When you create an MCP server, Redpanda automatically creates the `redpanda.otel_traces` topic in your cluster. This topic stores OpenTelemetry span data in JSON format, following the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/protocol/[OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)] specification.

A Protobuf schema named `redpanda.otel_traces-value` is also automatically registered with the topic, enabling clients to deserialize trace data correctly.

Each span represents a unit of work performed by your MCP server, such as:

* Tool invocation requests
* Data processing operations
* External API calls
* Error conditions
* Performance metrics

== Consume trace data

You can consume traces from the `redpanda.otel_traces` topic using any Kafka-compatible client or the Redpanda Console.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud UI::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Topics*.
. Select `redpanda.otel_traces`.
. Click *Messages* to view recent traces.
. Use filters to search for specific trace IDs, span names, or time ranges.
--

rpk CLI::
+
--
Consume the most recent traces:

[,bash]
----
rpk topic consume redpanda.otel_traces --offset end -n 10
----

Filter for specific MCP server activity by examining the span attributes.
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
Use the link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Data Plane API] to programmatically consume traces and integrate with your monitoring pipeline.
--
=====

== Trace data structure

Each trace message contains an OpenTelemetry span with the following structure:

[,json]
----
{
  "traceId": "71cad555b35602fbb35f035d6114db54",
  "spanId": "43ad6bc31a826afd",
  "parentSpanId": "",
  "name": "http_processor",
  "kind": 1,
  "startTimeUnixNano": "1765198415253280028",
  "endTimeUnixNano": "1765198424660663434",
  "attributes": [
    {
      "key": "city_name",
      "value": {"stringValue": "london"}
    },
    {
      "key": "result_length",
      "value": {"intValue": "198"}
    }
  ],
  "status": {
    "code": 0,
    "message": ""
  },
  "instrumentationScope": {
    "name": "rpcn-mcp"
  },
  "flags": 1
}
----

* `traceId`: Unique identifier for the entire trace (hex-encoded string).
* `spanId`: Unique identifier for this specific span (hex-encoded string).
* `parentSpanId`: Links child spans to parent operations (empty string if root span).
* `name`: Descriptive name of the operation (typically the tool name in the case of MCP servers).
* `kind`: Span kind as integer (see the `redpanda.otel_traces-value` schema for details).
* `startTimeUnixNano` / `endTimeUnixNano`: Timing information in nanoseconds since Unix epoch.
* `attributes`: Array of key-value pairs with contextual information about the operation.
* `status`: Operation status with `code` (0 = OK, 2 = ERROR) and optional `message`.
* `instrumentationScope`: Identifies the library or component that created the span.

=== Real trace examples

Here are actual traces from MCP tool executions showing the parent-child span relationships and detailed attributes.

**Successful tool execution:**

This trace shows an `http_processor` tool that fetched weather data for London. The parent span includes child spans for mutations, HTTP requests, and processing:

[source,json]
----
{
    "attributes": [
        {
            "key": "city_name",
            "value": {"stringValue": "london"}
        },
        {
            "key": "result_prefix",
            "value": {"stringValue": "{\"city\":\"london\",\"description\":\"Partly cloudy\",\"feels_like\":12,\"humidity\":88,\"metadata\":{\"fetched_at\":\"2025-12-08T12:53:44.660Z\""}
        },
        {
            "key": "result_length",
            "value": {"intValue": "198"}
        }
    ],
    "endTimeUnixNano": "1765198424660663434",
    "flags": 1,
    "instrumentationScope": {"name": "rpcn-mcp"},
    "kind": 1,
    "name": "http_processor",
    "spanId": "43ad6bc31a826afd",
    "startTimeUnixNano": "1765198415253280028",
    "status": {"code": 0, "message": ""},
    "traceId": "71cad555b35602fbb35f035d6114db54"
}
----

The parent span (`http_processor`) has child spans showing the processing pipeline:

[,json]
----
{
    "attributes": [],
    "endTimeUnixNano": "1765198424659619511",
    "flags": 1,
    "instrumentationScope": {"name": "benthos"},
    "kind": 1,
    "name": "http",
    "parentSpanId": "43ad6bc31a826afd",
    "spanId": "ed45544a7d7b08d4",
    "startTimeUnixNano": "1765198415253319496",
    "status": {"code": 0, "message": ""},
    "traceId": "71cad555b35602fbb35f035d6114db54"
}
----

* The parent span (`http_processor`) includes custom attributes like `city_name` and `result_length` that help debug and monitor tool behavior.
* Child spans use the same `traceId` but different `spanId` values.
* The `parentSpanId` in child spans matches the parent's `spanId`, creating the hierarchy.
* Duration can be calculated: `(1765198424660663434 - 1765198415253280028) / 1000000 = 9407ms`.

**Trace with error event:**

This trace shows an HTTP request that encountered an error during execution:

[,json]
----
{
    "attributes": [],
    "endTimeUnixNano": "1765198423080903265",
    "events": [
        {
            "attributes": [
                {
                    "key": "error",
                    "value": {"stringValue": "type"}
                }
            ],
            "name": "event",
            "timeUnixNano": "1765198420254169629"
        }
    ],
    "flags": 1,
    "instrumentationScope": {"name": "benthos"},
    "kind": 1,
    "name": "http_request",
    "parentSpanId": "43ad6bc31a826afd",
    "spanId": "ba332199f3af6d7f",
    "startTimeUnixNano": "1765198415253325782",
    "status": {"code": 0, "message": ""},
    "traceId": "71cad555b35602fbb35f035d6114db54"
}
----

* The span still shows `status.code: 0` (success) overall.
* However, the `events` array contains error information with `error: type`.
* This indicates a recoverable error or warning during execution.
* The event's `timeUnixNano` shows exactly when the error occurred.

== Common monitoring scenarios

=== Track tool invocations

Monitor which tools are being called and how often:

. Consume traces from `redpanda.otel_traces`
. Filter spans where `name` contains `tool_invocation`
. Examine the `mcp.tool.name` attribute to see which tools are being used
. Calculate frequency by counting spans per tool name over time windows

=== Measure performance

Analyze tool execution times:

. Find spans with `mcp.tool.name` attributes
. Calculate duration: `(endTimeUnixNano - startTimeUnixNano) / 1000000` (milliseconds)
. Track percentiles (p50, p95, p99) to identify performance issues
. Set alerts for durations exceeding acceptable thresholds

=== Debug failures

Investigate errors and failures:

. Filter spans where `status.code` is not `STATUS_CODE_OK`
. Look for `STATUS_CODE_ERROR` in the status field
. Examine `status.message` for error details
. Use `traceId` to correlate related spans and understand the full error context

=== Correlate distributed operations

Link MCP server activity to downstream effects:

. Extract `traceId` from tool invocation spans
. Search for the same `traceId` in other application logs or traces
. Follow `parentSpanId` relationships to build complete operation timelines
. Identify bottlenecks across your entire system

== Integration with observability platforms

The `redpanda.otel_traces` topic uses standard OpenTelemetry format, making it compatible with popular observability platforms.

=== Grafana Cloud

Export traces to Grafana Cloud's managed Tempo service:

. Get your Grafana Cloud OTLP endpoint and credentials:
+
* OTLP endpoint: `https://otlp-gateway-{region}.grafana.net/otlp/v1/traces`
* Instance ID (from your Grafana Cloud portal)
* API token or Access Policy token
. Create a Redpanda Connect pipeline that consumes from `redpanda.otel_traces`.
. Send traces to Grafana Cloud with authentication.
. View and query traces in your Grafana Cloud instance.

Example pipeline configuration:

[,yaml]
----
input:
  kafka:
    addresses: [ "${REDPANDA_BROKERS}" ]
    topics: [ "redpanda.otel_traces" ]
    consumer_group: "grafana-cloud-exporter"

pipeline:
  processors:
    - mapping: |
        root = this

output:
  http_client:
    url: "https://otlp-gateway-prod-us-central-0.grafana.net/otlp/v1/traces"
    verb: POST
    headers:
      Content-Type: "application/json"
      Authorization: "Basic ${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_INSTANCE_ID}:${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_TOKEN}"
    basic_auth:
      enabled: true
      username: "${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_INSTANCE_ID}"
      password: "${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_TOKEN}"
----

[TIP]
====
Store your Grafana Cloud credentials in the xref:develop:connect/configuration/secret-management.adoc[Secrets Store] and reference them using `${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_INSTANCE_ID}` and `${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_TOKEN}`.
====

=== Datadog

Forward traces to Datadog APM:

. Use Datadog Agent with OpenTelemetry support.
. Configure a pipeline to consume `redpanda.otel_traces`.
. Convert to Datadog trace format.
. View in Datadog APM with full correlation.

Commit message:

Add warning about redpanda.otel_traces topic management
   - Document automatic recreation of topic and schema if deleted
   - Warn that deleting topic permanently deletes all trace data
   - Clarify that users should not produce to this system-managed topic

modules/ai-agents/pages/mcp/remote/monitor-activity.adoc, after:

= Monitor Remote MCP Server Activity
:description: Learn how to monitor Remote MCP servers using OpenTelemetry traces, track tool invocations, debug failures, and integrate with observability platforms.

Every Remote MCP server automatically emits OpenTelemetry traces to a topic called `redpanda.otel_traces`. These traces provide detailed observability into your MCP server's operations, including tool invocations, processing times, errors, and resource usage.

== Prerequisites

You must have an existing MCP server. If you do not have one, see xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/quickstart.adoc[].

== OpenTelemetry traces topic

When you create an MCP server, Redpanda automatically creates the `redpanda.otel_traces` topic in your cluster. This topic stores OpenTelemetry span data in JSON format, following the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/protocol/[OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)] specification.

A Protobuf schema named `redpanda.otel_traces-value` is also automatically registered with the topic, enabling clients to deserialize trace data correctly.

The `redpanda.otel_traces` topic and its schema are managed automatically by Redpanda. If you delete either the topic or the schema, they are recreated automatically. However, deleting the topic permanently deletes all trace data, and the topic comes back empty. Do not produce your own data to this topic. It is reserved for OpenTelemetry traces.

Each span represents a unit of work performed by your MCP server, such as:

* Tool invocation requests
* Data processing operations
* External API calls
* Error conditions
* Performance metrics

== Consume trace data

You can consume traces from the `redpanda.otel_traces` topic using any Kafka-compatible client or the Redpanda Console.

[tabs]
=====
Cloud UI::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud Console, navigate to *Topics*.
. Select `redpanda.otel_traces`.
. Click *Messages* to view recent traces.
. Use filters to search for specific trace IDs, span names, or time ranges.
--

rpk CLI::
+
--
Consume the most recent traces:

[,bash]
----
rpk topic consume redpanda.otel_traces --offset end -n 10
----

Filter for specific MCP server activity by examining the span attributes.
--

Data Plane API::
+
--
Use the link:/api/doc/cloud-dataplane/topic/topic-quickstart[Data Plane API] to programmatically consume traces and integrate with your monitoring pipeline.
--
=====

== Trace data structure

Each trace message contains an OpenTelemetry span with the following structure:

[,json]
----
{
  "traceId": "71cad555b35602fbb35f035d6114db54",
  "spanId": "43ad6bc31a826afd",
  "parentSpanId": "",
  "name": "http_processor",
  "kind": 1,
  "startTimeUnixNano": "1765198415253280028",
  "endTimeUnixNano": "1765198424660663434",
  "attributes": [
    {
      "key": "city_name",
      "value": {"stringValue": "london"}
    },
    {
      "key": "result_length",
      "value": {"intValue": "198"}
    }
  ],
  "status": {
    "code": 0,
    "message": ""
  },
  "instrumentationScope": {
    "name": "rpcn-mcp"
  },
  "flags": 1
}
----

* `traceId`: Unique identifier for the entire trace (hex-encoded string).
* `spanId`: Unique identifier for this specific span (hex-encoded string).
* `parentSpanId`: Links child spans to parent operations (empty string if root span).
* `name`: Descriptive name of the operation (typically the tool name in the case of MCP servers).
* `kind`: Span kind as integer (see the `redpanda.otel_traces-value` schema for details).
* `startTimeUnixNano` / `endTimeUnixNano`: Timing information in nanoseconds since Unix epoch.
* `attributes`: Array of key-value pairs with contextual information about the operation.
* `status`: Operation status with `code` (0 = OK, 2 = ERROR) and optional `message`.
* `instrumentationScope`: Identifies the library or component that created the span.

=== Real trace examples

Here are actual traces from MCP tool executions showing the parent-child span relationships and detailed attributes.

**Successful tool execution:**

This trace shows an `http_processor` tool that fetched weather data for London. The parent span includes child spans for mutations, HTTP requests, and processing:

[source,json]
----
{
    "attributes": [
        {
            "key": "city_name",
            "value": {"stringValue": "london"}
        },
        {
            "key": "result_prefix",
            "value": {"stringValue": "{\"city\":\"london\",\"description\":\"Partly cloudy\",\"feels_like\":12,\"humidity\":88,\"metadata\":{\"fetched_at\":\"2025-12-08T12:53:44.660Z\""}
        },
        {
            "key": "result_length",
            "value": {"intValue": "198"}
        }
    ],
    "endTimeUnixNano": "1765198424660663434",
    "flags": 1,
    "instrumentationScope": {"name": "rpcn-mcp"},
    "kind": 1,
    "name": "http_processor",
    "spanId": "43ad6bc31a826afd",
    "startTimeUnixNano": "1765198415253280028",
    "status": {"code": 0, "message": ""},
    "traceId": "71cad555b35602fbb35f035d6114db54"
}
----

The parent span (`http_processor`) has child spans showing the processing pipeline:

[,json]
----
{
    "attributes": [],
    "endTimeUnixNano": "1765198424659619511",
    "flags": 1,
    "instrumentationScope": {"name": "benthos"},
    "kind": 1,
    "name": "http",
    "parentSpanId": "43ad6bc31a826afd",
    "spanId": "ed45544a7d7b08d4",
    "startTimeUnixNano": "1765198415253319496",
    "status": {"code": 0, "message": ""},
    "traceId": "71cad555b35602fbb35f035d6114db54"
}
----

* The parent span (`http_processor`) includes custom attributes like `city_name` and `result_length` that help debug and monitor tool behavior.
* Child spans use the same `traceId` but different `spanId` values.
* The `parentSpanId` in child spans matches the parent's `spanId`, creating the hierarchy.
* Duration can be calculated: `(1765198424660663434 - 1765198415253280028) / 1000000 = 9407ms`.

**Trace with error event:**

This trace shows an HTTP request that encountered an error during execution:

[,json]
----
{
    "attributes": [],
    "endTimeUnixNano": "1765198423080903265",
    "events": [
        {
            "attributes": [
                {
                    "key": "error",
                    "value": {"stringValue": "type"}
                }
            ],
            "name": "event",
            "timeUnixNano": "1765198420254169629"
        }
    ],
    "flags": 1,
    "instrumentationScope": {"name": "benthos"},
    "kind": 1,
    "name": "http_request",
    "parentSpanId": "43ad6bc31a826afd",
    "spanId": "ba332199f3af6d7f",
    "startTimeUnixNano": "1765198415253325782",
    "status": {"code": 0, "message": ""},
    "traceId": "71cad555b35602fbb35f035d6114db54"
}
----

* The span still shows `status.code: 0` (success) overall.
* However, the `events` array contains error information with `error: type`.
* This indicates a recoverable error or warning during execution.
* The event's `timeUnixNano` shows exactly when the error occurred.

== Common monitoring scenarios

=== Track tool invocations

Monitor which tools are being called and how often:

. Consume traces from `redpanda.otel_traces`
. Filter spans where `name` contains `tool_invocation`
. Examine the `mcp.tool.name` attribute to see which tools are being used
. Calculate frequency by counting spans per tool name over time windows

=== Measure performance

Analyze tool execution times:

. Find spans with `mcp.tool.name` attributes
. Calculate duration: `(endTimeUnixNano - startTimeUnixNano) / 1000000` (milliseconds)
. Track percentiles (p50, p95, p99) to identify performance issues
. Set alerts for durations exceeding acceptable thresholds

=== Debug failures

Investigate errors and failures:

. Filter spans where `status.code` is not `STATUS_CODE_OK`
. Look for `STATUS_CODE_ERROR` in the status field
. Examine `status.message` for error details
. Use `traceId` to correlate related spans and understand the full error context

=== Correlate distributed operations

Link MCP server activity to downstream effects:

. Extract `traceId` from tool invocation spans
. Search for the same `traceId` in other application logs or traces
. Follow `parentSpanId` relationships to build complete operation timelines
. Identify bottlenecks across your entire system

== Integration with observability platforms

The `redpanda.otel_traces` topic uses standard OpenTelemetry format, making it compatible with popular observability platforms.

=== Grafana Cloud

Export traces to Grafana Cloud's managed Tempo service:

. Get your Grafana Cloud OTLP endpoint and credentials:
+
* OTLP endpoint: `https://otlp-gateway-{region}.grafana.net/otlp/v1/traces`
* Instance ID (from your Grafana Cloud portal)
* API token or Access Policy token
. Create a Redpanda Connect pipeline that consumes from `redpanda.otel_traces`.
. Send traces to Grafana Cloud with authentication.
. View and query traces in your Grafana Cloud instance.

Example pipeline configuration:

[,yaml]
----
input:
  kafka:
    addresses: [ "${REDPANDA_BROKERS}" ]
    topics: [ "redpanda.otel_traces" ]
    consumer_group: "grafana-cloud-exporter"

pipeline:
  processors:
    - mapping: |
        root = this

output:
  http_client:
    url: "https://otlp-gateway-prod-us-central-0.grafana.net/otlp/v1/traces"
    verb: POST
    headers:
      Content-Type: "application/json"
      Authorization: "Basic ${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_INSTANCE_ID}:${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_TOKEN}"
    basic_auth:
      enabled: true
      username: "${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_INSTANCE_ID}"
      password: "${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_TOKEN}"
----

[TIP]
====
Store your Grafana Cloud credentials in the xref:develop:connect/configuration/secret-management.adoc[Secrets Store] and reference them using `${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_INSTANCE_ID}` and `${secrets.GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_TOKEN}`.
====

=== Datadog

Forward traces to Datadog APM:

. Use Datadog Agent with OpenTelemetry support.
. Configure a pipeline to consume `redpanda.otel_traces`.
. Convert to Datadog trace format.
. View in Datadog APM with full correlation.
