modules/ai-agents/pages/mcp/remote/overview.adoc, before:

= Remote MCP Server Overview
:description: Discover how AI agents can interact with your streaming data and how to connect them to Redpanda Cloud.
:page-topic-type: overview
:personas: evaluator, ai_agent_developer
// Reader journey: "I'm evaluating this"
// Learning objectives - what readers should understand after reading this page:
:learning-objective-1: Explain what a Remote MCP server is and how tools differ from pipelines
:learning-objective-2: Identify use cases where Remote MCP provides business value
:learning-objective-3: Describe how MCP tools expose Redpanda Connect components to AI

This page introduces Remote MCP servers and helps you decide if they're right for your use case.

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== What is MCP?

// What is MCP - single-sourced from rp-connect-docs partial
include::redpanda-connect:ai-agents:partial$mcp/overview/what-is-mcp.adoc[]

== What is Remote MCP?

Remote MCP lets you build and host MCP servers in your Redpanda Cloud clusters. Your tools run next to your data, managed by Redpanda, so you get:

* *Always-on availability:* No local process to run. Your tools are hosted and managed by Redpanda Cloud.
* *Proximity to data:* Tools execute next to your cluster for lower latency and simpler networking.
* *Secure secrets management:* Use the xref:develop:connect/configuration/secret-management.adoc[Secrets Store] instead of hardcoding credentials.
* *Fast iteration:* Define tools as YAML, deploy, and your AI agents can use them immediately.

// MCP tools vs pipelines - single-sourced from rp-connect-docs partial
include::redpanda-connect:ai-agents:partial$mcp/overview/mcp-vs-pipelines.adoc[]

// Use cases table - single-sourced from rp-connect-docs partial
include::redpanda-connect:ai-agents:partial$mcp/overview/use-cases-table.adoc[]

== How it works

Remote MCP servers sit between AI clients and your data:

. Your AI agent connects to your MCP server using `rpk cloud mcp proxy` or direct authentication
. A user asks their AI agent something like "What's the weather in London?"
. The server finds the matching tool and runs your Redpanda Connect configuration
. Your configuration fetches data, transforms it, and returns a structured response
. The AI agent gets the data and can use it to answer the user

=== What a tool looks like

A tool is a YAML configuration with two parts: the logic (what the tool does) and the metadata (how AI understands it).

Here's a minimal example that returns weather data:

[source,yaml]
----
http:
  url: "https://wttr.in/${! this.city }?format=j1"
  verb: GET

meta:
  mcp:
    enabled: true
    name: get_weather
    description: "Get current weather for a city"
    properties:
      - name: city
        type: string
        description: "City name"
        required: true
----

When an AI client asks about weather, it calls this tool with the city name. The tool fetches data from the weather API and returns it.

// MCP specification support - single-sourced from rp-connect-docs partial
include::redpanda-connect:ai-agents:partial$mcp/overview/specification-support.adoc[]

== Next steps

* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/quickstart.adoc[]
* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/concepts.adoc[]: Learn about execution and component types
* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/create-tool.adoc[]: Create custom tools step by step
* link:https://modelcontextprotocol.io/[Model Context Protocol documentation^]

Commit message:

Improve AI agents documentation readability and structure
- Fix period usage in numbered steps and bold labels across all AI agent docs
- Add descriptive link text to xref anchor links for better accessibility
- Redesign monitor-agents.adoc reducing lists from 9 to 2, converting to prose and tables
- Create observability index page
- Fix broken xref from billing.adoc to observability/concepts.adoc

modules/ai-agents/pages/mcp/remote/overview.adoc, after:

= Remote MCP Server Overview
:description: Discover how AI agents can interact with your streaming data and how to connect them to Redpanda Cloud.
:page-topic-type: overview
:personas: evaluator, ai_agent_developer
// Reader journey: "I'm evaluating this"
// Learning objectives - what readers should understand after reading this page:
:learning-objective-1: Explain what a Remote MCP server is and how tools differ from pipelines
:learning-objective-2: Identify use cases where Remote MCP provides business value
:learning-objective-3: Describe how MCP tools expose Redpanda Connect components to AI

This page introduces Remote MCP servers and helps you decide if they're right for your use case.

After reading this page, you will be able to:

* [ ] {learning-objective-1}
* [ ] {learning-objective-2}
* [ ] {learning-objective-3}

== What is MCP?

// What is MCP - single-sourced from rp-connect-docs partial
include::redpanda-connect:ai-agents:partial$mcp/overview/what-is-mcp.adoc[]

== What is Remote MCP?

Remote MCP lets you build and host MCP servers in your Redpanda Cloud clusters. Your tools run next to your data, managed by Redpanda, so you get:

* *Always-on availability:* No local process to run. Your tools are hosted and managed by Redpanda Cloud.
* *Proximity to data:* Tools execute next to your cluster for lower latency and simpler networking.
* *Secure secrets management:* Use the xref:develop:connect/configuration/secret-management.adoc[Secrets Store] instead of hardcoding credentials.
* *Fast iteration:* Define tools as YAML, deploy, and your AI agents can use them immediately.

// MCP tools vs pipelines - single-sourced from rp-connect-docs partial
include::redpanda-connect:ai-agents:partial$mcp/overview/mcp-vs-pipelines.adoc[]

// Use cases table - single-sourced from rp-connect-docs partial
include::redpanda-connect:ai-agents:partial$mcp/overview/use-cases-table.adoc[]

== How it works

Remote MCP servers sit between AI clients and your data:

. Your AI agent connects to your MCP server using `rpk cloud mcp proxy` or direct authentication.
. A user asks their AI agent something like "What's the weather in London?"
. The server finds the matching tool and runs your Redpanda Connect configuration.
. Your configuration fetches data, transforms it, and returns a structured response.
. The AI agent gets the data and can use it to answer the user.

=== What a tool looks like

A tool is a YAML configuration with two parts: the logic (what the tool does) and the metadata (how AI understands it).

Here's a minimal example that returns weather data:

[source,yaml]
----
include::ai-agents:example$mcp-tools/processors/get_weather_simple.yaml[tag=complete,indent=0]
----

When an AI client asks about weather, it calls this tool with the city name. The tool fetches data from the weather API and returns it.

// MCP specification support - single-sourced from rp-connect-docs partial
include::redpanda-connect:ai-agents:partial$mcp/overview/specification-support.adoc[]

== Next steps

* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/quickstart.adoc[]
* xref:ai-agents:agents/overview.adoc[]: Learn about Redpanda AI Agents that use MCP tools
* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/concepts.adoc[]: Learn about execution and component types
* xref:ai-agents:mcp/remote/create-tool.adoc[]: Create custom tools step by step
* link:https://modelcontextprotocol.io/[Model Context Protocol documentation^]
