modules/manage/pages/monitor-cloud.adoc, before:

= Monitor Redpanda Cloud
:description: Learn how to configure monitoring on your BYOC or Dedicated cluster to maintain system health and optimize performance.
:page-aliases: manage:monitoring.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/monitor-cloud.adoc

You can configure monitoring on your Redpanda BYOC or Dedicated cluster to maintain system health and optimize performance. You can monitor Redpanda with https://prometheus.io/[Prometheus^] or with any other monitoring and alerting tool, such as Datadog, New Relic, Elastic Cloud, Google Cloud, or Azure.

Redpanda Cloud exports Redpanda metrics for all brokers and connectors from a single OpenMetrics endpoint. This endpoint can be found on the *Overview* page for your cluster, under *How to connect* and *Prometheus*.


[NOTE]
====

- To maximize performance, Redpanda exports some metrics only when the underlying feature is in use. For example, a metric for consumer groups, xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset[`redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset`], is only exported when groups are registered.
- Operating system-level and node-level metrics (such as CPU, memory, disk, and network usage) are not available through this endpoint. For infrastructure monitoring, use your cloud provider's native monitoring tools (such as Azure Monitor, AWS CloudWatch, or Google Cloud Monitoring).
====

== Configure Redpanda monitoring

To monitor a BYOC or Dedicated cluster:

. On the Redpanda Cloud *Overview* page for your cluster, under *How to connect*, click the *Prometheus* tab. 

. Click the copy icon for *Prometheus YAML* to copy the contents to your clipboard. 
+
The YAML contains the Prometheus scrape target configuration, as well as authentication, for the cluster.
+
image::shared:cloud_metrics.png[How to connect screenshot]
+
[,yaml]
----
- job_name: redpandaCloud-sample
  static_configs:
    - targets:
        - console-<id>.<identifier>.byoc.cloud.redpanda.com
  metrics_path: /api/cloud/prometheus/public_metrics
  basic_auth:
    username: prometheus
    password: "<prom_pass>"
  scheme: https
----

. Save these settings to Prometheus or another monitoring tool, replacing the following placeholders:
+
* `<id>.<identifier>`: ID and identifier from the HTTPS endpoint.
* `<prom_pass>`: Copy and paste the onscreen Prometheus password.


== Configure Datadog

To monitor a Dedicated or BYOC cluster in https://www.datadoghq.com/[Datadog^]: 

. Follow the steps to configure Redpanda monitoring.

. In Datadog, define the `openmetrics_endpoint` URL for that monitored cluster. The integration configuration should look similar to the following:
+
[,yaml]
----
instances:
  # The endpoint to collect metrics from.
  - openmetrics_endpoint: https://console-<id>.<identifier>.fmc.cloud.redpanda.com/api/cloud/prometheus/public_metrics
    use_openmetrics: true
    collect_counters_with_distributions: true

    auth_type: basic
    username: prom_user
    password: prom_pass
----

. Restart the Datadog agent.

NOTE: Because the OpenMetrics endpoint in Redpanda Cloud aggregates Redpanda metrics for all cluster services, only a single Datadog agent is required. The agent must run in a container in your own container infrastructure. Redpanda does not support launching this container inside a Dedicated or BYOC Kubernetes cluster. For more information, see the https://docs.datadoghq.com/integrations/redpanda/?tab=host[Datadog documentation^] and https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-extras/tree/master/redpanda[Redpanda Datadog integration^].

== Use Redpanda monitoring examples

For hands-on learning, Redpanda provides a repository with examples of monitoring Redpanda with Prometheus and Grafana: https://github.com/redpanda-data/observability/tree/main/cloud[redpanda-data/observability^].

image::https://github.com/redpanda-data/observability/blob/main/docs/images/Ops%20Dashboard.png?raw=true[Example Redpanda Ops Dashboard^]

It includes https://github.com/redpanda-data/observability#grafana-dashboards[example Grafana dashboards^] and a https://github.com/redpanda-data/observability#sandbox-environment[sandbox environment^] in which you launch a Dockerized Redpanda cluster and create a custom workload to monitor with dashboards.

== Monitor health and performance

include::ROOT:manage:partial$monitor-health.adoc[tag=single-source]

== References

* xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[Metrics Reference]

Commit message:

DOC-1682 Monitoring not supported on Serverless

modules/manage/pages/monitor-cloud.adoc, after:

= Monitor Redpanda Cloud
:description: Learn how to configure monitoring on your BYOC or Dedicated cluster to maintain system health and optimize performance.
:page-aliases: manage:monitoring.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/monitor-cloud.adoc

You can configure monitoring on your cluster to maintain system health and optimize performance. You can monitor Redpanda with https://prometheus.io/[Prometheus^] or with any other monitoring and alerting tool, such as Datadog, New Relic, Elastic Cloud, Google Cloud, or Azure.

Redpanda Cloud exports Redpanda metrics for all brokers and connectors from a single OpenMetrics endpoint. This endpoint can be found on the *Overview* page for your BYOC or Dedicated cluster, under *How to connect* and *Prometheus*.


[NOTE]
====

- BYOC and Dedicated clusters can export Redpanda metrics to a third-party monitoring system. Serverless clusters _cannot_ export Redpanda metrics.
- To maximize performance, Redpanda exports some metrics only when the underlying feature is in use. For example, a metric for consumer groups, xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset[`redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset`], is only exported when groups are registered.
- Operating system-level and node-level metrics (such as CPU, memory, disk, and network usage) are not available through this endpoint. For infrastructure monitoring, use your cloud provider's native monitoring tools (such as Azure Monitor, AWS CloudWatch, or Google Cloud Monitoring).
====

== Configure Redpanda monitoring

To monitor a BYOC or Dedicated cluster:

. On the Redpanda Cloud *Overview* page for your cluster, under *How to connect*, click the *Prometheus* tab. 

. Click the copy icon for *Prometheus YAML* to copy the contents to your clipboard. 
+
The YAML contains the Prometheus scrape target configuration, as well as authentication, for the cluster.
+
image::shared:cloud_metrics.png[How to connect screenshot]
+
[,yaml]
----
- job_name: redpandaCloud-sample
  static_configs:
    - targets:
        - console-<id>.<identifier>.byoc.cloud.redpanda.com
  metrics_path: /api/cloud/prometheus/public_metrics
  basic_auth:
    username: prometheus
    password: "<prom_pass>"
  scheme: https
----

. Save these settings to Prometheus or another monitoring tool, replacing the following placeholders:
+
* `<id>.<identifier>`: ID and identifier from the HTTPS endpoint.
* `<prom_pass>`: Copy and paste the onscreen Prometheus password.


== Configure Datadog

To monitor a Dedicated or BYOC cluster in https://www.datadoghq.com/[Datadog^]: 

. Follow the steps to configure Redpanda monitoring.

. In Datadog, define the `openmetrics_endpoint` URL for that monitored cluster. The integration configuration should look similar to the following:
+
[,yaml]
----
instances:
  # The endpoint to collect metrics from.
  - openmetrics_endpoint: https://console-<id>.<identifier>.fmc.cloud.redpanda.com/api/cloud/prometheus/public_metrics
    use_openmetrics: true
    collect_counters_with_distributions: true

    auth_type: basic
    username: prom_user
    password: prom_pass
----

. Restart the Datadog agent.

NOTE: Because the OpenMetrics endpoint in Redpanda Cloud aggregates Redpanda metrics for all cluster services, only a single Datadog agent is required. The agent must run in a container in your own container infrastructure. Redpanda does not support launching this container inside a Dedicated or BYOC Kubernetes cluster. For more information, see the https://docs.datadoghq.com/integrations/redpanda/?tab=host[Datadog documentation^] and https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-extras/tree/master/redpanda[Redpanda Datadog integration^].

== Use Redpanda monitoring examples

For hands-on learning, Redpanda provides a repository with examples of monitoring Redpanda with Prometheus and Grafana: https://github.com/redpanda-data/observability/tree/main/cloud[redpanda-data/observability^].

image::https://github.com/redpanda-data/observability/blob/main/docs/images/Ops%20Dashboard.png?raw=true[Example Redpanda Ops Dashboard^]

It includes https://github.com/redpanda-data/observability#grafana-dashboards[example Grafana dashboards^] and a https://github.com/redpanda-data/observability#sandbox-environment[sandbox environment^] in which you launch a Dockerized Redpanda cluster and create a custom workload to monitor with dashboards.

== Monitor health and performance

include::ROOT:manage:partial$monitor-health.adoc[tag=single-source]

== References

* xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[Metrics Reference]
