modules/reference/partials/tiers.adoc, before:

ifdef::env-byoc[]
== BYOC usage tiers

When you create a BYOC cluster, you select your usage tier. Each tier provides tested workload configurations for maximum throughput, partitions, and connections. 

|=== 
| Tier | Ingress | Egress | Logical partitions | Connections

| Tier 1 | 20 MBps | 60 MBps | 1,000 | 9,000
| Tier 2 | 50 MBps | 150 MBps | 2,800 | 22,500
| Tier 3 | 100 MBps | 200 MBps | 5,600 | 45,000
| Tier 4 | 200 MBps | 400 MBps | 11,300 | 90,000
| Tier 5 | 400 MBps | 800 MBps | 22,800 | 180,000
| Tier 6 | 800 MBps | 1,600 MBps | 45,000 | 180,000
| Tier 7 | 1,200 MBps | 2,400 MBps | 67,500 | 270,000
| Tier 8 | 1,600 MBps | 3,200 MBps | 90,000 | 360,000
| Tier 9 | 2,000 MBps | 4,000 MBps | 112,500 | 450,000
|===

[NOTE]
====
* On Azure, tiers 1-3 are supported. 
* Depending on the workload, it may not be possible to achieve all maximum values. For example, a high number of partitions may make it more difficult to reach the maximum value in throughput.
* Logical partition counts assume the Redpanda Cloud default replication factor of 3. If you set a higher replication factor, the maximum value for partitions will be lower.
* Connections are regulated per broker for best performance. For example, in a tier 1 cluster with 3 brokers, there could be up to 3,000 connections per broker. 

====

== BYOC supported regions

[tabs]
====
Google Cloud Platform (GCP)::
+
--
|=== 
| Region 

| asia-east1 
| asia-northeast1
| asia-south1 
| asia-southeast1
| australia-southeast1
| europe-west1
| europe-west2
| europe-west3
| northamerica-northeast1
| southamerica-east1
| us-central1
| us-east1
| us-east4
| us-west1
|===
--
Amazon Web Services (AWS)::
+
--
|=== 
| Region 

| af-south-1 
| ap-east-1
| ap-northeast-1
| ap-south-1
| ap-southeast-1
| ap-southeast-2
| ca-central-1
| eu-central-1
| eu-west-1
| eu-west-2
| me-central-1
| sa-east-1
| us-east-1
| us-east-2
| us-west-2
|===
--

Azure::
+
--
|=== 
| Region

| Central US
| East US 
| East US 2
| Norway East
| UK South
|===
--
====
endif::[]

ifndef::env-byoc[]
== Dedicated usage tiers

When you create a Dedicated cluster, you select your usage tier. Each tier provides tested workload configurations for maximum throughput, partitions, and connections. 

|=== 
| Tier | Ingress | Egress | Logical partitions | Connections

| Tier 1 | 20 MBps | 60 MBps | 1,000 | 9,000
| Tier 2 | 50 MBps | 150 MBps | 2,800 | 22,500
| Tier 3 | 100 MBps | 200 MBps | 5,600 | 45,000
| Tier 4 | 200 MBps | 400 MBps | 11,300 | 90,000
| Tier 5 | 400 MBps | 800 MBps | 22,800 | 180,000
|===

[NOTE]
====
* Depending on the workload, it may not be possible to achieve all maximum values. For example, a high number of partitions may make it more difficult to reach the maximum value in throughput.
* Logical partition counts assume the Redpanda Cloud default replication factor of 3. If you set a higher replication factor, the maximum value for partitions will be lower.
* Connections are regulated per broker for best performance. For example, in a tier 1 cluster with 3 brokers, there could be up to 3,000 connections per broker. 

====

== Dedicated supported regions

[tabs]
====
Google Cloud Platform (GCP)::
+
--
|=== 
| Region 

| asia-east1 
| asia-northeast1
| asia-south1 
| asia-southeast1
| australia-southeast1
| europe-west1
| europe-west2
| northamerica-northeast1
| southamerica-east1
| us-central1
| us-east1
|===
--
Amazon Web Services (AWS)::
+
--
|=== 
| Region 

| ap-east-1
| ap-northeast-1
| ap-south-1
| ap-southeast-1
| ap-southeast-2
| ca-central-1
| eu-central-1
| eu-west-1
| eu-west-2
| me-central-1
| us-east-1
| us-east-2
| us-west-2
|===
--
====
endif::[]

Commit message:

Azure support for Dedicated (#33)
* #2669 Azure support for Dedicated

* minor edit

* update regions, per Nate

* minor edit in nav.adoc

* remove Norway East

+ nav edits

* note only support tiers 1-3

* rename file and add redirect

renamed so the page doens't look specific to AWS

* Add automation for npm update (#35)

* Add GH Action

* Update reviewers

* Apply suggestions from code review

* Update update-extensions.yml

* Update update-extensions.yml (#37)

* Update @redpanda-data/docs-extensions-and-macros (#42)

Co-authored-by: vbotbuildovich <vbotbuildovich@users.noreply.github.com>

* Use 'jq -r' instead of sed to remove quotes (#40)

* Add Azure to cloud docs (#38)

* Add Dedicated to Private Link doc

* Add Azure to Cloud API docs

* Minor edit to code examples

* Add Private Link to nav tree under Dedicated

* Note that the page is for AWS steps only

* Tabs in alphabetical order

* update rpk cloud byoc (#39)

* #2226 update rpk cloud byoc

* minor nav update

* change what's new from August to Sept

* minor edits from doc review

---------

Co-authored-by: Jake Cahill <45230295+JakeSCahill@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: vbotbuildovich <62446873+vbotbuildovich@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: vbotbuildovich <vbotbuildovich@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Michael Maltese <ligfx@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Kat Batuigas <36839689+kbatuigas@users.noreply.github.com>

modules/reference/partials/tiers.adoc, after:

ifdef::env-byoc[]
== BYOC usage tiers

When you create a BYOC cluster, you select your usage tier. Each tier provides tested workload configurations for maximum throughput, partitions, and connections. 

|=== 
| Tier | Ingress | Egress | Logical partitions | Connections

| Tier 1 | 20 MBps | 60 MBps | 1,000 | 9,000
| Tier 2 | 50 MBps | 150 MBps | 2,800 | 22,500
| Tier 3 | 100 MBps | 200 MBps | 5,600 | 45,000
| Tier 4 | 200 MBps | 400 MBps | 11,300 | 90,000
| Tier 5 | 400 MBps | 800 MBps | 22,800 | 180,000
| Tier 6 | 800 MBps | 1,600 MBps | 45,000 | 180,000
| Tier 7 | 1,200 MBps | 2,400 MBps | 67,500 | 270,000
| Tier 8 | 1,600 MBps | 3,200 MBps | 90,000 | 360,000
| Tier 9 | 2,000 MBps | 4,000 MBps | 112,500 | 450,000
|===

[NOTE]
====
* On Azure, tiers 1-3 are supported. 
* Depending on the workload, it may not be possible to achieve all maximum values. For example, a high number of partitions may make it more difficult to reach the maximum value in throughput.
* Logical partition counts assume the Redpanda Cloud default replication factor of 3. If you set a higher replication factor, the maximum value for partitions will be lower.
* Connections are regulated per broker for best performance. For example, in a tier 1 cluster with 3 brokers, there could be up to 3,000 connections per broker. 

====

== BYOC supported regions

[tabs]
====
Google Cloud Platform (GCP)::
+
--
|=== 
| Region 

| asia-east1 
| asia-northeast1
| asia-south1 
| asia-southeast1
| australia-southeast1
| europe-west1
| europe-west2
| europe-west3
| northamerica-northeast1
| southamerica-east1
| us-central1
| us-east1
| us-east4
| us-west1
|===
--
Amazon Web Services (AWS)::
+
--
|=== 
| Region 

| af-south-1 
| ap-east-1
| ap-northeast-1
| ap-south-1
| ap-southeast-1
| ap-southeast-2
| ca-central-1
| eu-central-1
| eu-west-1
| eu-west-2
| me-central-1
| sa-east-1
| us-east-1
| us-east-2
| us-west-2
|===
--

Azure::
+
--
|=== 
| Region

| Central US
| East US 
| East US 2
| Norway East
| UK South
|===
--
====
endif::[]

ifndef::env-byoc[]
== Dedicated usage tiers

When you create a Dedicated cluster, you select your usage tier. Each tier provides tested workload configurations for maximum throughput, partitions, and connections. 

|=== 
| Tier | Ingress | Egress | Logical partitions | Connections

| Tier 1 | 20 MBps | 60 MBps | 1,000 | 9,000
| Tier 2 | 50 MBps | 150 MBps | 2,800 | 22,500
| Tier 3 | 100 MBps | 200 MBps | 5,600 | 45,000
| Tier 4 | 200 MBps | 400 MBps | 11,300 | 90,000
| Tier 5 | 400 MBps | 800 MBps | 22,800 | 180,000
|===

[NOTE]
====
* On Azure, tiers 1-3 are supported. 
* Depending on the workload, it may not be possible to achieve all maximum values. For example, a high number of partitions may make it more difficult to reach the maximum value in throughput.
* Logical partition counts assume the Redpanda Cloud default replication factor of 3. If you set a higher replication factor, the maximum value for partitions will be lower.
* Connections are regulated per broker for best performance. For example, in a tier 1 cluster with 3 brokers, there could be up to 3,000 connections per broker. 

====

== Dedicated supported regions

[tabs]
====
Google Cloud Platform (GCP)::
+
--
|=== 
| Region 

| asia-east1 
| asia-northeast1
| asia-south1 
| asia-southeast1
| australia-southeast1
| europe-west1
| europe-west2
| northamerica-northeast1
| southamerica-east1
| us-central1
| us-east1
|===
--
Amazon Web Services (AWS)::
+
--
|=== 
| Region 

| ap-east-1
| ap-northeast-1
| ap-south-1
| ap-southeast-1
| ap-southeast-2
| ca-central-1
| eu-central-1
| eu-west-1
| eu-west-2
| me-central-1
| us-east-1
| us-east-2
| us-west-2
|===
--
Azure::
+
--
|=== 
| Region

| East US 
| North Europe
| UK South
|===
--
====
endif::[]
