modules/manage/pages/api/cloud-api-quickstart.adoc, before:

= Redpanda Cloud API Quickstart
:description: Learn how to quickly start using the Cloud API to manage clusters and other resources.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/api/cloud-api-quickstart.adoc
:page-api: cloud
:page-beta: true

The following steps describe how to authenticate with the Cloud API and create a new Redpanda cluster. For more information on the Cloud API, see the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API Overview].

== Create a new cluster

[tabs]
======
BYOC or Dedicated::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, create a https://cloud.redpanda.com/clients[service account (client)] and use the client ID and secret to request an API token. Use the token to xref:manage:api/cloud-api-authentication.adoc[authenticate to the API].
. Create a resource group by making a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/resource-groups[`POST /v1beta2/resource-groups`] request.
. Create a network by making a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/networks[`POST /v1beta2/networks`] request. Note that this operation may be long-running.
. Create a cluster by making a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/clusters[`POST /v1beta2/clusters`] request.
. For BYOC, run `rpk cloud byoc`, passing the `metadata.cluster_id` from the Create Cluster response as a flag:
+
AWS:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc aws apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id>
```
+
Azure:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc azure apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id> --subscription-id=<redpanda-cluster-azure-subscription-id>
```
+
GCP:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id> --project-id=<gcp-project-id>
```
--

Serverless::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, create a https://cloud.redpanda.com/clients[service account (client)] and use the client ID and secret to request an API token. Use the token to xref:manage:api/cloud-api-authentication.adoc[authenticate to the API].
. Make a GET request to the `/v1beta2/resource-groups` endpoint to retrieve the default resource group ID.
+
[,bash]
----
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/resource-groups
----
. Make a GET request to the `/v1beta2/serverless/regions` endpoint to see available regions.
+
[,bash]
----
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" 'https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/serverless/regions?cloud_provider=CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS'
----
. Create a cluster by making a POST request to the `/v1beta2/serverless/clusters` endpoint.
+
[,bash]
----
curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
-d '{
  "name": <serverless-cluster-name>,
  "resource_group_id": <resource-group-id>,
  "serverless_region": "pro-us-east-1" 
}' -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/serverless/clusters
----
--
======

== Try the Cloud API

You can issue requests against the Cloud API from your browser when viewing the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-api.adoc[API reference]. 

Complete the following steps:

. Go to *Authentication* in the sidebar.
. Click *Get Token*.
. If successful, the text “1 API key applied” displays under the *Authentication* section of this page. The token is valid for an hour.
. Choose the correct API server for your request.

WARNING: Your API requests are executed against your actual environment and data, not a sandbox. 

=== Make a request to the Control Plane API

For requests to the Control Plane API endpoints:

. Click *API Servers* in the sidebar. 
. Select “https://api.redpanda.com - Control Plane API”. 
. From the Control Plane API endpoints, you can make a request by using the *Try* option. Make sure to enter any required parameter values, and provide the request body object if necessary.

=== Make a request to the Data Plane APIs

For requests to the Data Plane API endpoints: 

. Make a Get Cluster (BYOC, Dedicated) or Get Serverless Cluster (Serverless) request for your target cluster.
. The Get Cluster response contains the Data Plane API URL. Copy the value of `dataplane_api.url` from the response body. 
. Click *API Servers* in the sidebar and select “\{dataplane_api_url} - Data Plane API”.
. Paste the URL into the `dataplane_api_url` input field.
. From the Data Plane API endpoints, you can make a request by using the *Try* option. Make sure to enter any required parameter values, and provide the request body object if necessary.

== See also

- xref:manage:api/controlplane/index.adoc[Use the Control Plane API]
- xref:manage:api/cloud-dataplane-api.adoc[Use the Data Plane APIs]

Commit message:

Update xrefs for control plane and data plane

modules/manage/pages/api/cloud-api-quickstart.adoc, after:

= Redpanda Cloud API Quickstart
:description: Learn how to quickly start using the Cloud API to manage clusters and other resources.
:page-aliases: deploy:deployment-option/cloud/api/cloud-api-quickstart.adoc
:page-api: cloud
:page-beta: true

The following steps describe how to authenticate with the Cloud API and create a new Redpanda cluster. For more information on the Cloud API, see the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API Overview].

== Create a new cluster

[tabs]
======
BYOC or Dedicated::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, create a https://cloud.redpanda.com/clients[service account (client)] and use the client ID and secret to request an API token. Use the token to xref:manage:api/cloud-api-authentication.adoc[authenticate to the API].
. Create a resource group by making a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/resource-groups[`POST /v1beta2/resource-groups`] request.
. Create a network by making a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/networks[`POST /v1beta2/networks`] request. Note that this operation may be long-running.
. Create a cluster by making a xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1beta2/clusters[`POST /v1beta2/clusters`] request.
. For BYOC, run `rpk cloud byoc`, passing the `metadata.cluster_id` from the Create Cluster response as a flag:
+
AWS:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc aws apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id>
```
+
Azure:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc azure apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id> --subscription-id=<redpanda-cluster-azure-subscription-id>
```
+
GCP:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id> --project-id=<gcp-project-id>
```
--

Serverless::
+
--
. In the Redpanda Cloud UI, create a https://cloud.redpanda.com/clients[service account (client)] and use the client ID and secret to request an API token. Use the token to xref:manage:api/cloud-api-authentication.adoc[authenticate to the API].
. Make a GET request to the `/v1beta2/resource-groups` endpoint to retrieve the default resource group ID.
+
[,bash]
----
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/resource-groups
----
. Make a GET request to the `/v1beta2/serverless/regions` endpoint to see available regions.
+
[,bash]
----
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" 'https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/serverless/regions?cloud_provider=CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS'
----
. Create a cluster by making a POST request to the `/v1beta2/serverless/clusters` endpoint.
+
[,bash]
----
curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
-d '{
  "name": <serverless-cluster-name>,
  "resource_group_id": <resource-group-id>,
  "serverless_region": "pro-us-east-1" 
}' -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1beta2/serverless/clusters
----
--
======

== Try the Cloud API

You can issue requests against the Cloud API from your browser when viewing the API reference. 

On the Control Plane API or Data Plane API references, complete the following steps:

. Go to *Authentication* in the sidebar.
. Click *Get Token*.
. If successful, the text “1 API key applied” displays under the *Authentication* section of this page. The token is valid for an hour.
. Choose the correct API server for your <<make-a-request-to-the-control-plane-api,Control Plane API>> or <<make-a-request-to-the-data-plane-apis,Data Plane API>> request.

WARNING: Your API requests are executed against your actual environment and data, not a sandbox. 

=== Make a request to the Control Plane API

For requests to the Control Plane API endpoints:

. Click *API Servers* in the sidebar. 
. Select “https://api.redpanda.com - Control Plane API”. 
. From the Control Plane API endpoints, you can make a request by using the *Try* option. Make sure to enter any required parameter values, and provide the request body object if necessary.

=== Make a request to the Data Plane APIs

For requests to the Data Plane API endpoints: 

. Make a Get Cluster (BYOC, Dedicated) or Get Serverless Cluster (Serverless) request for your target cluster.
. The Get Cluster response contains the Data Plane API URL. Copy the value of `dataplane_api.url` from the response body. 
. Click *API Servers* in the sidebar and select “\{dataplane_api_url} - Data Plane API”.
. Paste the URL into the `dataplane_api_url` input field.
. From the Data Plane API endpoints, you can make a request by using the *Try* option. Make sure to enter any required parameter values, and provide the request body object if necessary.

== See also

- xref:manage:api/controlplane/index.adoc[Use the Control Plane API]
- xref:manage:api/cloud-dataplane-api.adoc[Use the Data Plane APIs]
