modules/networking/pages/byoc/gcp/enable-global-access.adoc, before:

= Enable Global Access 
:description: Learn how to enable global access for new BYOC and BYOVPC clusters on GCP.

By default, the seed load balancer for a cluster on GCP only accepts connections from the same region where the cluster is deployed. In Redpanda Cloud, the seed load balancer is the bootstrap server address you configure in your clients. If your Redpanda Cloud clients and BYOC or BYOVPC cluster are not all in the same GCP region, you must enable https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/internal/setting-up-internal#ilb-global-access[global access^].

Global access lets the seed load balancer accept connections from clients outside your cluster's region, then route them to the appropriate broker addresses for producing and consuming data. You can enable global access when you create a new BYOC or BYOVPC cluster on GCP.


In this guide, you use the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API] to create a resource group, network, and cluster with global access enabled on GCP. 

== Limitations

You can only use the Cloud API to enable global access as part of cluster creation, and not on existing clusters. Enabling global access on a running cluster requires recreating the GCP forwarding rule, which may cause some downtime. To enable global access on an existing cluster, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda Support^].

== Get a Cloud API access token

include::networking:partial$private-links-api-access-token.adoc[]

== Create a cluster with global access

=== Create a resource group

Make a request to the `POST /v1/resource-groups` endpoint and store the ID of the resource group you create.

[,bash]
----
export RESOURCE_GROUP_ID=$(curl -X POST \
  https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "resource_group": {
      "name": "<resource-group-name>"
    }
  }' | jq -r '.resource_group.id')
----


If you're creating a BYOVPC cluster, continue to the next section. Otherwise, if you're creating a standard BYOC cluster, skip ahead to <<create-a-network>>.

=== BYOVPC only: Configure customer-managed resources

. Before you proceed, check the xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#prerequisites[prerequisites and limitations] for new BYOVPC clusters on GCP.
. Follow the steps to xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#configure-your-vpc[configure your VPC] with the required permissions and firewall rules.
. Follow the next steps to xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#configure-the-service-project[configure the service project] and service account bindings.

=== Create a network

Make a request to the `POST /v1/networks` endpoint and store the ID of the network you create.

* For standard BYOC clusters, run: 
+
.Show BYOC network creation command
[%collapsible]
====
[,bash]
----
NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "network": {
    "name": "<byoc-network-name>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "cidr_block": "10.0.0.0/20"
  }
}
EOF`

export NETWORK_ID=$(curl -vv -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
-d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks | jq -r '.operation.metadata.network_id')
----
====

* For BYOVPC clusters, you also make a request to the `POST /v1/networks` endpoint, with a different request body:
+
.Show BYOVPC network creation command
[%collapsible]
====
[,bash]
----
NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "network": {
    "name": "<shared-vpc-name>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "customer_managed_resources": {
        "gcp": {
            "network_name": "<byovpc-network-name>",
            "network_project_id": "<byovpc-network-gcp-project-id>",
            "management_bucket": { "name" : "<byovpc-management-bucket>" }
        }
    }
}
EOF`

export NETWORK_ID=$(curl -vv -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
-d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks | jq -r '.operation.metadata.network_id')
----

Replace the following placeholder variables for the request body:


- `<shared-vpc-name>`: The name for the Redpanda network. 
- `<gcp-region>`: The GCP region where the network will be created.
- `<byovpc-network-gcp-project-id>`: The ID of the GCP project where your VPC is created.
- `<byovpc-network-name>`: The name of your VPC.
- `<byovpc-management-bucket>`: The name of the Google Storage bucket you created for the cluster.

====

Note that this endpoint returns a long-running operation. To check the operation state, use the `GET /v1/operations/\{operation_id}` endpoint.

=== Enable global access

. Make a request to the `POST /v1/clusters` endpoint to create a new cluster with global access enabled (`"gcp_enable_global_access": true`).

* For BYOC clusters, run:
+
.Show BYOC cluster creation command
[%collapsible]
====
[,bash,lines=12]
----
CLUSTER_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "cluster": {
    "name": "<cluster-name>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "zones": <gcp-zones>,
    "throughput_tier": "<usage-tier>",
    "gcp_enable_global_access": true
  }
}
EOF`

export CLUSTER_ID=$(curl -X POST \
  https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  -d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" | jq -r '.operation.metadata.cluster_id')
----

Replace the following placeholder variables for the request body:

- `<cluster-name>`: The name for the Redpanda cluster.
- `<gcp-region>`: The GCP region where the cluster will be created.
- `<gcp-zones>`: Provide the list of GCP zones where the brokers will be deployed. Format: `["<zone 1>", "<zone 2>", "<zone N>"]`
- `<usage-tier>`: Choose a Redpanda Cloud cluster tier. For example, `tier-1-gcp-v2-x86`.

====

* For BYOVPC clusters, you also make a request to the `POST /v1/clusters` endpoint, with a different request body:
+
.Show BYOVPC cluster creation command
[%collapsible]
====
[,bash,lines=14]
----
CLUSTER_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "cluster": {
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
    "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "name": "<cluster-name>",
        "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
        "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
        "region": "<gcp-region>",
        "zones": <gcp-zones>,
        "throughput_tier": "<usage-tier>",
        "redpanda_version": "<redpanda-version>",
        "gcp_enable_global_access": true,
        "customer_managed_resources": {
            "gcp": {
                "subnet": {
                    "name":"<byovpc-subnet-name>",
                    "secondary_ipv4_range_pods": { 
                        "name": "<byovpc-subnet-pods-range-name>" 
                    },
                    "secondary_ipv4_range_services": { 
                        "name": "<byovpc-subnet-services-range-name>" 
                    },
                    "k8s_master_ipv4_range": "<byovpc-subnet-master-range>"
                },
                "agent_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-agent-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "connector_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-connectors-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "console_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-console-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "redpanda_cluster_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-redpanda-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "gke_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-gke-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "tiered_storage_bucket": { 
                    "name" : "<byovpc-tiered-storage-bucket>" 
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
EOF`

export CLUSTER_ID=$(curl -vv -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
-d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters | jq -r '.operation.metadata.cluster_id')
----

Replace the following placeholders for the request body. Variables with a `byovpc_` prefix represent the customer-managed resources that you set up previously:

- `<cluster-name>`: Provide a name for the new cluster.
- `<gcp-region>`: Choose a GCP region where the cluster will be created.
- `<gcp-zones>`: Provide the list of GCP zones where the brokers will be deployed. Format: `["<zone 1>", "<zone 2>", "<zone N>"]`
- `<usage-tier>`: Choose a Redpanda Cloud cluster tier. For example, `tier-1-gcp-v2-x86`.
- `<redpanda-version>`: Choose the Redpanda Cloud version.
- `<byovpc-subnet-name>`: The name of the GCP subnet that was created for the cluster.
- `<byovpc-subnet-pods-range-name>`: The name of the IPv4 range designated for K8s pods.
- `<byovpc-subnet-services-range-name>`: The name of the IPv4 range designated for services.
- `<byovpc-subnet-master-range>`: The master IPv4 range.
- `<byovpc-agent-service-acc-email>`: The email for the agent service account.
- `<byovpc-connectors-service-acc-email>`: The email for the connectors service account.
- `<byovpc-console-service-acc-email>`: The email for the Console service account.
- `<byovpc-redpanda-service-acc-email>`: The email for the Redpanda service account.
- `<byovpc-gke-service-acc-email>`: The email for the GKE service account.
- `<byovpc-tiered-storage-bucket>`: The name of the Google Storage bucket to use for Tiered Storage.

====

. Run `rpk cloud byoc gcp apply`:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp apply --redpanda-id="${CLUSTER_ID}" --project-id='<gcp-service-project-id>'
```

== Test global access

To test if global access is successfully enabled, see the https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/internal/setting-up-internal#gcloud_17[GCP documentation^].

Commit message:

Bump xref cleanup (#389)
* Continue URL migration batch - update cloud-api references, fix deprecation policy header

* remaining updates

* These topics are migrated to Bump

* Missed edits

* Missed edits

modules/networking/pages/byoc/gcp/enable-global-access.adoc, after:

= Enable Global Access 
:description: Learn how to enable global access for new BYOC and BYOVPC clusters on GCP.

By default, the seed load balancer for a cluster on GCP only accepts connections from the same region where the cluster is deployed. In Redpanda Cloud, the seed load balancer is the bootstrap server address you configure in your clients. If your Redpanda Cloud clients and BYOC or BYOVPC cluster are not all in the same GCP region, you must enable https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/internal/setting-up-internal#ilb-global-access[global access^].

Global access lets the seed load balancer accept connections from clients outside your cluster's region, then route them to the appropriate broker addresses for producing and consuming data. You can enable global access when you create a new BYOC or BYOVPC cluster on GCP.


In this guide, you use the link:/api/doc/cloud-controlplane/topic/topic-cloud-api-overview[Redpanda Cloud API] to create a resource group, network, and cluster with global access enabled on GCP. 

== Limitations

You can only use the Cloud API to enable global access as part of cluster creation, and not on existing clusters. Enabling global access on a running cluster requires recreating the GCP forwarding rule, which may cause some downtime. To enable global access on an existing cluster, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda Support^].

== Get a Cloud API access token

include::networking:partial$private-links-api-access-token.adoc[]

== Create a cluster with global access

=== Create a resource group

Make a request to the `POST /v1/resource-groups` endpoint and store the ID of the resource group you create.

[,bash]
----
export RESOURCE_GROUP_ID=$(curl -X POST \
  https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "resource_group": {
      "name": "<resource-group-name>"
    }
  }' | jq -r '.resource_group.id')
----


If you're creating a BYOVPC cluster, continue to the next section. Otherwise, if you're creating a standard BYOC cluster, skip ahead to <<create-a-network>>.

=== BYOVPC only: Configure customer-managed resources

. Before you proceed, check the xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#prerequisites[prerequisites and limitations] for new BYOVPC clusters on GCP.
. Follow the steps to xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#configure-your-vpc[configure your VPC] with the required permissions and firewall rules.
. Follow the next steps to xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc#configure-the-service-project[configure the service project] and service account bindings.

=== Create a network

Make a request to the `POST /v1/networks` endpoint and store the ID of the network you create.

* For standard BYOC clusters, run: 
+
.Show BYOC network creation command
[%collapsible]
====
[,bash]
----
NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "network": {
    "name": "<byoc-network-name>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "cidr_block": "10.0.0.0/20"
  }
}
EOF`

export NETWORK_ID=$(curl -vv -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
-d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks | jq -r '.operation.metadata.network_id')
----
====

* For BYOVPC clusters, you also make a request to the `POST /v1/networks` endpoint, with a different request body:
+
.Show BYOVPC network creation command
[%collapsible]
====
[,bash]
----
NETWORK_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "network": {
    "name": "<shared-vpc-name>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "customer_managed_resources": {
        "gcp": {
            "network_name": "<byovpc-network-name>",
            "network_project_id": "<byovpc-network-gcp-project-id>",
            "management_bucket": { "name" : "<byovpc-management-bucket>" }
        }
    }
}
EOF`

export NETWORK_ID=$(curl -vv -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
-d "$NETWORK_POST_BODY" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks | jq -r '.operation.metadata.network_id')
----

Replace the following placeholder variables for the request body:


- `<shared-vpc-name>`: The name for the Redpanda network. 
- `<gcp-region>`: The GCP region where the network will be created.
- `<byovpc-network-gcp-project-id>`: The ID of the GCP project where your VPC is created.
- `<byovpc-network-name>`: The name of your VPC.
- `<byovpc-management-bucket>`: The name of the Google Storage bucket you created for the cluster.

====

Note that this endpoint returns a long-running operation. To check the operation state, use the `GET /v1/operations/\{operation_id}` endpoint.

=== Enable global access

. Make a request to the `POST /v1/clusters` endpoint to create a new cluster with global access enabled (`"gcp_enable_global_access": true`).

* For BYOC clusters, run:
+
.Show BYOC cluster creation command
[%collapsible]
====
[,bash,lines=12]
----
CLUSTER_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "cluster": {
    "name": "<cluster-name>",
    "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
    "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "region": "<gcp-region>",
    "zones": <gcp-zones>,
    "throughput_tier": "<usage-tier>",
    "gcp_enable_global_access": true
  }
}
EOF`

export CLUSTER_ID=$(curl -X POST \
  https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
  -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  -d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" | jq -r '.operation.metadata.cluster_id')
----

Replace the following placeholder variables for the request body:

- `<cluster-name>`: The name for the Redpanda cluster.
- `<gcp-region>`: The GCP region where the cluster will be created.
- `<gcp-zones>`: Provide the list of GCP zones where the brokers will be deployed. Format: `["<zone 1>", "<zone 2>", "<zone N>"]`
- `<usage-tier>`: Choose a Redpanda Cloud cluster tier. For example, `tier-1-gcp-v2-x86`.

====

* For BYOVPC clusters, you also make a request to the `POST /v1/clusters` endpoint, with a different request body:
+
.Show BYOVPC cluster creation command
[%collapsible]
====
[,bash,lines=14]
----
CLUSTER_POST_BODY=`cat << EOF
{
  "cluster": {
    "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
    "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
    "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
    "name": "<cluster-name>",
        "resource_group_id": "$RESOURCE_GROUP_ID",
        "network_id": "$NETWORK_ID",
        "region": "<gcp-region>",
        "zones": <gcp-zones>,
        "throughput_tier": "<usage-tier>",
        "redpanda_version": "<redpanda-version>",
        "gcp_enable_global_access": true,
        "customer_managed_resources": {
            "gcp": {
                "subnet": {
                    "name":"<byovpc-subnet-name>",
                    "secondary_ipv4_range_pods": { 
                        "name": "<byovpc-subnet-pods-range-name>" 
                    },
                    "secondary_ipv4_range_services": { 
                        "name": "<byovpc-subnet-services-range-name>" 
                    },
                    "k8s_master_ipv4_range": "<byovpc-subnet-master-range>"
                },
                "agent_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-agent-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "connector_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-connectors-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "console_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-console-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "redpanda_cluster_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-redpanda-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "gke_service_account": { 
                    "email": "<byovpc-gke-service-acc-email>" 
                },
                "tiered_storage_bucket": { 
                    "name" : "<byovpc-tiered-storage-bucket>" 
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
EOF`

export CLUSTER_ID=$(curl -vv -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer $AUTH_TOKEN" \
-d "$CLUSTER_POST_BODY" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters | jq -r '.operation.metadata.cluster_id')
----

Replace the following placeholders for the request body. Variables with a `byovpc_` prefix represent the customer-managed resources that you set up previously:

- `<cluster-name>`: Provide a name for the new cluster.
- `<gcp-region>`: Choose a GCP region where the cluster will be created.
- `<gcp-zones>`: Provide the list of GCP zones where the brokers will be deployed. Format: `["<zone 1>", "<zone 2>", "<zone N>"]`
- `<usage-tier>`: Choose a Redpanda Cloud cluster tier. For example, `tier-1-gcp-v2-x86`.
- `<redpanda-version>`: Choose the Redpanda Cloud version.
- `<byovpc-subnet-name>`: The name of the GCP subnet that was created for the cluster.
- `<byovpc-subnet-pods-range-name>`: The name of the IPv4 range designated for K8s pods.
- `<byovpc-subnet-services-range-name>`: The name of the IPv4 range designated for services.
- `<byovpc-subnet-master-range>`: The master IPv4 range.
- `<byovpc-agent-service-acc-email>`: The email for the agent service account.
- `<byovpc-connectors-service-acc-email>`: The email for the connectors service account.
- `<byovpc-console-service-acc-email>`: The email for the Console service account.
- `<byovpc-redpanda-service-acc-email>`: The email for the Redpanda service account.
- `<byovpc-gke-service-acc-email>`: The email for the GKE service account.
- `<byovpc-tiered-storage-bucket>`: The name of the Google Storage bucket to use for Tiered Storage.

====

. Run `rpk cloud byoc gcp apply`:
+
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp apply --redpanda-id="${CLUSTER_ID}" --project-id='<gcp-service-project-id>'
```

== Test global access

To test if global access is successfully enabled, see the https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/internal/setting-up-internal#gcloud_17[GCP documentation^].
