modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/byoc/azure/vnet-azure.adoc, before:

= Create a BYOVPC Cluster on Azure
:description: Connect Redpanda Cloud to your existing VNet for additional security.
:page-beta: true

include::shared:partial$feature-flag-rpcn.adoc[]

This topic explains how to create a Bring Your Own Virtual Private Cloud (BYOVPC) cluster. This setup allows you to deploy the Redpanda glossterm:data plane[] into your existing virtual network (VNet) and take full control of managing the networking lifecycle. Compared to a standard Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC) setup, where Redpanda manages the networking lifecycle for you, this option provides more security.

When you create a BYOVPC cluster, you specify your VNet and managed identities. The Redpanda Cloud agent doesn't create any new resources or alter any settings in your account. With a customer-managed VNet: 

* You provide your own VNet in your Azure account.
* You maintain more control over your account, because Redpanda requires fewer permissions than standard BYOC clusters.
* You control your security resources and policies, including subnets, user-assigned identities, IAM roles and assignments, security groups, storage accounts, and key vaults.

The https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/tree/main/customer-managed/azure/README.md[Redpanda Cloud Examples repository^] contains https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform[Terraform^] code that deploys the resources required for a BYOVPC cluster on Azure. You'll need to create these resources in advance and give them to Redpanda during cluster creation. Variables are provided in the code so you can exclude resources that already exist in your environment, such as the VNet.

See the code for the complete list of resources required to create and deploy Redpanda cluster. Customer-managed resources can be broken down into the following groups:

* Resource group resources
* User-assigned identities
* IAM roles and assignments
* Network
* Storage
* Key vaults

== Prerequisites

* Access to an Azure subscription where you want to create your cluster
* Knowledge of your internal VNet and subnet configuration
* Permission to call the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API]
* Permission to create, modify, and delete the resources described by Terraform
* https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install[Terraform^] version 1.8.5 or later
* https://jqlang.org/download/[jq^], which is used to parse JSON values from API responses

== Limitations

* Existing clusters cannot be moved to a BYOVPC cluster.
* After creating a BYOVPC cluster, you cannot change to a different VNet.
* Only primary CIDR ranges are supported for the VNet.

== Set environment variables

Set environment variables for the resource group, VNet name, and Azure region. For example:

```bash
export AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME=sample-redpanda-rg
export AZURE_VNET_NAME="sample-vnet"
export AZURE_REGION=eastus
```

== Create Azure resource group and VNet

. Create a resource group to contain all resources, and then create a VNet with your address and subnet prefixes.
+
The following example uses the environment variables to create the `sample-redpanda-rg` resource group and the `sample-vnet` virtual network with an address space of `10.0.0.0/16` and a subnet named `default` with a smaller range of `10.0.0.0/24`.
+
```bash
az group create --name ${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME} --location ${AZURE_REGION}

az network vnet create \
    --name ${AZURE_VNET_NAME} \
    --resource-group $AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME \
    --location ${AZURE_REGION} \
    --address-prefix 10.0.0.0/16 \
    --subnet-name default \
    --subnet-prefixes 10.0.0.0/24
```

. Set additional environment variables for Azure resources. For example:
+
```bash
export AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=
export AZURE_TENANT_ID=
export AZURE_ZONES=["eastus-az2"]
export AZURE_RESOURCE_PREFIX=sample-
```

== Configure Terraform

NOTE: For simplicity, these instructions assume that Terraform is configured to use local state. You may want to configure https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/state/remote[remote state^]. 

Create a JSON file called `byovnet.auto.tfvars.json` inside the Terraform directory to configure variables for your specific needs:

.Show script
[%collapsible]
====
```bash
cat > byovnet.auto.tfvars.json <<EOF 
{
  "azure_subscription_id": "${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}",
  "azure_tenant_id": "${AZURE_TENANT_ID}",
  "azure_use_cli": "true",
  "region": "${AZURE_REGION}",
  "zones": ${AZURE_ZONES},
  "resource_name_prefix": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_PREFIX}",
  "tags": {},
  "redpanda_resource_group_name": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}",
  "redpanda_storage_resource_group_name": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}",
  "redpanda_network_resource_group_name": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}",
  "redpanda_iam_resource_group_name": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}",
  "redpanda_agent_identity_name": "agent-uai",
  "redpanda_agent_role_name": "agent-role",
  "redpanda_cert_manager_identity_name": "cert-manager-uai",
  "redpanda_external_dns_identity_name": "external-dns-uai",
  "redpanda_cluster_identity_name": "cluster-uai",
  "aks_identity_name": "aks-uai",
  "redpanda_console_identity_name": "console-uai",
  "redpanda_console_role_name": "console-role",
  "kafka_connect_identity_name": "",
  "redpanda_management_storage_account_name": "rpmgmtsa",
  "redpanda_management_storage_container_name": "rpmgmtsc",
  "redpanda_tiered_storage_account_name": "tieredsa",
  "redpanda_tiered_storage_container_name": "tieredsc",
  "redpanda_management_key_vault_name": "redpanda-vault",
  "redpanda_console_key_vault_name": "rp-console-vault",
  "redpanda_private_link_role_name": "pl-role",
  "vnet_name": "${AZURE_VNET_NAME}",
  "vnet_addresses": [
    "10.0.0.0/20"
  ],
  "private_subnets": {
    "agent-private": {
      "cidr": "10.0.3.0/24",
      "name": "snet-agent-private"
    },
    "connect-pod": {
      "cidr": "10.0.10.0/24",
      "name": "snet-connect-pods"
    },
    "connect-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.11.0/24",
      "name": "snet-connect-vnet"
    },
    "kafka-connect-pod": {
      "cidr": "10.0.12.0/24",
      "name": "snet-kafka-connect-pods"
    },
    "kafka-connect-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.13.0/24",
      "name": "snet-kafka-connect-vnet"
    },
    "rp-0-pods": {
      "cidr": "10.0.4.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-0-pods"
    },
    "rp-0-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.5.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-0-vnet"
    },
    "rp-1-pods": {
      "cidr": "10.0.6.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-1-pods"
    },
    "rp-1-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.7.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-1-vnet"
    },
    "rp-2-pods": {
      "cidr": "10.0.8.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-2-pods"
    },
    "rp-2-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.9.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-2-vnet"
    },
    "system-pod": {
      "cidr": "10.0.1.0/24",
      "name": "snet-system-pods"
    },
    "system-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.2.0/24",
      "name": "snet-system-vnet"
    }
  },
  "egress_subnets": {
    "agent-public": {
      "cidr": "10.0.0.0/24",
      "name": "snet-agent-public"
    }
  },
  "reserved_subnet_cidrs": {
    "k8s-service": "10.0.15.0/24"
  },
  "redpanda_security_group_name": "redpanda-nsg"
}
EOF
```
====

== Deploy Terraform

Initialize, plan, and apply Terraform to set up the Azure infrastructure:

```bash
terraform init &&
terraform plan &&
terraform apply
```

Note the output values that the `terraform apply` command displays. The output values are necessary in later steps. To continue with cluster creation, see https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/tree/main/customer-managed/azure#create-azure-byo-vnet-redpanda-cluster[Create Azure VNet Redpanda Cluster^].

You can also get these values by running `terraform output`. For example:

.Show output from `terraform output`
[%collapsible]
====
```bash
agent_private_subnet_name = "my-snet-agent-private"
agent_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-agent-uai"
aks_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-aks-uai"
cert_manager_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-cert-manager-uai"
cluster_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-cluster-uai"
console_key_vault_name = "my-consolevault"
console_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-console-uai"
egress_subnet_name = "my-snet-agent-public"
external_dns_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-external-dns-uai"
iam_resource_group_name = "my-iam-rg"
kafka_connect_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-kafka-connect-pods"
kafka_connect_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-kafka-connect-uai"
kafka_connect_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-kafka-connect-vnet"
management_bucket_storage_account_name = "mymanagement"
management_bucket_storage_container_name = "mymanagement"
management_key_vault_name = "my-redpandavault"
network_resource_group_name = "my-network-rg"
......
redpanda_resource_group_name = "my-redpanda-rg"
redpanda_security_group_name = "my-redpanda-nsg"
......
rp_0_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-0-pods"
rp_0_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-0-vnet"
rp_1_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-1-pods"
rp_1_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-1-vnet"
rp_2_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-2-pods"
rp_2_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-2-vnet"
rp_connect_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-connect-pods"
rp_connect_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-connect-vnet"
......
storage_resource_group_name = "my-storage-rg"
system_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-system-pods"
system_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-system-vnet"
tiered_storage_account_name = "mytieredstorage"
tiered_storage_container_name = "mytieredstorage"
......
vnet_name = "my-rp-vnet"
```
====

The https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/blob/main/customer-managed/azure/terraform/README.md[Terraform Readme] has more information about variable files: 

* `vars.azure.tf`: Contains the variables related to Azure credentials.
* `vars.condition.tf`: Contains the conditional variables; for example, on whether to create NAT.
* `vars.customer_input.tf`: Contains the variables needed to create a cluster with the Cloud API.
* `vars.iam.tf`: Contains the variables related to IAM roles.
* `vars.misc.tf`: Contains the variables, regions, zones, tags, and resource name prefix.

== Authenticate with Redpanda Cloud

Get a glossterm:bearer token[] from the Cloud API authentication endpoint using your Redpanda credentials:

```bash
export REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID=
export REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET=

export BEARER_TOKEN=$(curl --request POST \
--url 'https://auth.prd.cloud.redpanda.com/oauth/token' \
--header 'content-type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
--data grant_type=client_credentials \
--data client_id=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID} \
--data client_secret=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET} \
--data audience=cloudv2-production.redpanda.cloud | jq -r '.access_token')
```

TIP: To get the Redpanda authentication credentials, follow the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-quickstart.adoc[].

== Create network

To create the Redpanda network:

. Define a JSON file called `redpanda-network.json` to configure the network for Redpanda with details about VNet, subnets, and storage.
+
.Show script
[%collapsible]
====
```bash
cat > redpanda-network.json <<EOF 
{
  "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AZURE",
  "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
  "name": "$rp_cluster_name",
  "resource_group_id": "${REDPANDA_RG_ID}",
  "region": "${AZURE_REGION}",
   "customer_managed_resources": {
      "azure" : {
         "management_bucket" : {
            "storage_account_name": "${REDPANDA_MANAGEMENT_STORAGE_ACCOUNT}",
            "storage_container_name": "${REDPANDA_MANAGEMENT_STORAGE_CONTAINER}",
            "resource_group" : { "name" : "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}" }
         },
         "vnet" : {
            "name" : "${AZURE_VNET_NAME}",
            "resource_group" : { "name" : "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}" }
         },
         "subnets" : {
            "rp_0_pods" : { "name" : "$rp_0_pods_subnet_name" },
            "rp_0_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_0_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "rp_1_pods" : { "name" : "$rp_1_pods_subnet_name" },
            "rp_1_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_2_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "rp_2_pods" : { "name" : "$rp_2_pods_subnet_name" },
            "rp_2_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_2_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "rp_connect_pods" : { "name" : "$rp_connect_pods_subnet_name" },
            "rp_connect_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_connect_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "kafka_connect_pods" : { "name" : "$kafka_connect_pods_subnet_name" },
            "kafka_connect_vnet" : { "name" : "$kafka_connect_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "sys_pods" : { "name" : "$system_pods_subnet_name" },
            "sys_vnet" : { "name" : "$system_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "rp_agent" :  { "name" : "$rp_agent_subnet_name" },
            "rp_egress_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_egress_subnet_name" }
         }
      }
   }
}
EOF
```
====

. Use the Cloud API to create the network and retrieve the network ID:
+
```bash
export REDPANDA_NETWORK_ID=$(curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks" \
 -H "accept: application/json" \
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" \
 --data-binary @redpanda-network.json | jq -r '.operation.id')
```

== Create cluster

To create the Redpanda cluster:

. Define a JSON file called `redpanda-cluster.json` that includes cluster information:
+
.Show script
[%collapsible]
====
```bash
cat > redpanda-cluster.json <<EOF 
{
  "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AZURE",
  "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
  "name": "$cluster_name",
  "resource_group_id": "$namespace_id",
  "network_id": "$network_id",
  "region": "$region",
  "zones": [ $zones ],
  "throughput_tier": "$tier",
  "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
  "customer_managed_resources" : {
     "azure" : {
       "cidrs" : {
          "aks_service_cidr" : "$aks_subnet_cidr"
       },
       "key_vaults": {
          "console_vault": { "name": "$redpanda_console_key_vault_name" },
          "management_vault": { "name": "$redpanda_management_key_vault_name" }
       },
       "resource_groups" : {
          "iam_resource_group" : { "name": "$redpanda_iam_resource_group_name" },
          "redpanda_resource_group" : { "name": "$redpanda_resource_group_name" },
          "storage_resource_group" : { "name": "$redpanda_storage_resource_group_name" }
       },
       "security_groups" : {
          "redpanda_security_group" : { "name": "$redpanda_security_group_name" }
       },
       "tiered_cloud_storage" : {
         "storage_account_name": "$redpanda_tiered_storage_account_name",
         "storage_container_name": "$redpanda_tiered_storage_container_name"
       },
       "user_assigned_identities" : {
         "agent_user_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$agent_user_assigned_identity_name" },
         "aks_user_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$aks_user_assigned_identity_name" },
         "cert_manager_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$cert_manager_assigned_identity_name" },
         "external_dns_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$external_dns_assigned_identity_name" },
         "redpanda_cluster_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$redpanda_cluster_assigned_identity_name" },
         "redpanda_console_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$redpanda_console_assigned_identity_name" },
         "kafka_connect_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$kafka_connect_assigned_identity_name" }
       }
     }
  }
}
EOF
```
====
+
TIP: See the full list of zones and tiers available with each provider in the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#api-description[Control Plane API reference].

. Make a Cloud API call to create a Redpanda network and get the network ID from the response in JSON `.operation.metadata.network_id`.
+
```bash
export REDPANDA_ID=$(curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\ 
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" \
 --data-binary @redpanda-cluster.json | jq -r '.operation.resource_id')
```

== Create cluster resources

To create the initial cluster resources, first log in to Redpanda Cloud, then run `rpk cloud byoc azure apply`:

```bash
rpk cloud login \
  --save \
  --client-id=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID} \
  --client-secret=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET} \
  --no-profile
```

```
rpk cloud byoc azure apply --redpanda-id="${REDPANDA_ID}" --subscription-id="${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}"
```

The Redpanda Cloud agent now is running and handles the remaining steps. This can take up to 45 minutes. When provisioning completes, the cluster status updates to `Running`. If the cluster remains in `Creating` status after 45 minutes, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda Support^].

== Check cluster status

Cluster creation is an example of an operation that can take a longer period of time to complete. You can check the operation state with the Cloud API, or check the Redpanda Cloud UI for cluster status.

Example using the returned `operation_id`:

```bash
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/operations/<operation-id>" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}"
```

Example retrieving cluster:

```bash
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/<resource-id>" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}"
```

== Delete cluster

To delete the cluster, first send a DELETE request to the Cloud API, and retrieve the `resource_id` of the DELETE operation. Then run the `rpk` command to destroy the cluster identified by the `resource_id`.

```bash
export REDPANDA_ID=$(curl -X DELETE "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/${REDPANDA_ID}" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" | jq -r '.operation.resource_id')
```

After that completes, run: 

```bash
rpk cloud byoc azure destroy --redpanda-id ${REDPANDA_ID}
```

include::get-started:partial$no-access.adoc[]

Commit message:

DOC-1162 move BYOC arch (#249)
* DOC-1162 move BYOC arch

* add/update links in BYOC pages

* Update modules/get-started/pages/byoc-arch.adoc

Co-authored-by: hyperlint-ai[bot] <154288675+hyperlint-ai[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

* Update modules/get-started/pages/cloud-overview.adoc

Co-authored-by: Kat Batuigas <36839689+kbatuigas@users.noreply.github.com>

---------

Co-authored-by: hyperlint-ai[bot] <154288675+hyperlint-ai[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Kat Batuigas <36839689+kbatuigas@users.noreply.github.com>

modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/byoc/azure/vnet-azure.adoc, after:

= Create a BYOVPC Cluster on Azure
:description: Connect Redpanda Cloud to your existing VNet for additional security.
:page-beta: true

include::shared:partial$feature-flag-rpcn.adoc[]

This topic explains how to create a Bring Your Own Virtual Private Cloud (BYOVPC) cluster. This setup allows you to deploy the Redpanda glossterm:data plane[] into your existing virtual network (VNet) and take full control of managing the networking lifecycle. See also: xref:get-started:byoc-arch.adoc[BYOC architecture]. 

Compared to a standard Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC) setup, where Redpanda manages the networking lifecycle for you, BYOVPC provides more security.

When you create a BYOVPC cluster, you specify your VNet and managed identities. The Redpanda Cloud agent doesn't create any new resources or alter any settings in your account. With a customer-managed VNet: 

* You provide your own VNet in your Azure account.
* You maintain more control over your account, because Redpanda requires fewer permissions than standard BYOC clusters.
* You control your security resources and policies, including subnets, user-assigned identities, IAM roles and assignments, security groups, storage accounts, and key vaults.

The https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/tree/main/customer-managed/azure/README.md[Redpanda Cloud Examples repository^] contains https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform[Terraform^] code that deploys the resources required for a BYOVPC cluster on Azure. You'll need to create these resources in advance and give them to Redpanda during cluster creation. Variables are provided in the code so you can exclude resources that already exist in your environment, such as the VNet.

See the code for the complete list of resources required to create and deploy Redpanda cluster. Customer-managed resources can be broken down into the following groups:

* Resource group resources
* User-assigned identities
* IAM roles and assignments
* Network
* Storage
* Key vaults

== Prerequisites

* Access to an Azure subscription where you want to create your cluster
* Knowledge of your internal VNet and subnet configuration
* Permission to call the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-overview.adoc[Redpanda Cloud API]
* Permission to create, modify, and delete the resources described by Terraform
* https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install[Terraform^] version 1.8.5 or later
* https://jqlang.org/download/[jq^], which is used to parse JSON values from API responses

== Limitations

* Existing clusters cannot be moved to a BYOVPC cluster.
* After creating a BYOVPC cluster, you cannot change to a different VNet.
* Only primary CIDR ranges are supported for the VNet.

== Set environment variables

Set environment variables for the resource group, VNet name, and Azure region. For example:

```bash
export AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME=sample-redpanda-rg
export AZURE_VNET_NAME="sample-vnet"
export AZURE_REGION=eastus
```

== Create Azure resource group and VNet

. Create a resource group to contain all resources, and then create a VNet with your address and subnet prefixes.
+
The following example uses the environment variables to create the `sample-redpanda-rg` resource group and the `sample-vnet` virtual network with an address space of `10.0.0.0/16` and a subnet named `default` with a smaller range of `10.0.0.0/24`.
+
```bash
az group create --name ${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME} --location ${AZURE_REGION}

az network vnet create \
    --name ${AZURE_VNET_NAME} \
    --resource-group $AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME \
    --location ${AZURE_REGION} \
    --address-prefix 10.0.0.0/16 \
    --subnet-name default \
    --subnet-prefixes 10.0.0.0/24
```

. Set additional environment variables for Azure resources. For example:
+
```bash
export AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=
export AZURE_TENANT_ID=
export AZURE_ZONES=["eastus-az2"]
export AZURE_RESOURCE_PREFIX=sample-
```

== Configure Terraform

NOTE: For simplicity, these instructions assume that Terraform is configured to use local state. You may want to configure https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/state/remote[remote state^]. 

Create a JSON file called `byovnet.auto.tfvars.json` inside the Terraform directory to configure variables for your specific needs:

.Show script
[%collapsible]
====
```bash
cat > byovnet.auto.tfvars.json <<EOF 
{
  "azure_subscription_id": "${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}",
  "azure_tenant_id": "${AZURE_TENANT_ID}",
  "azure_use_cli": "true",
  "region": "${AZURE_REGION}",
  "zones": ${AZURE_ZONES},
  "resource_name_prefix": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_PREFIX}",
  "tags": {},
  "redpanda_resource_group_name": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}",
  "redpanda_storage_resource_group_name": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}",
  "redpanda_network_resource_group_name": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}",
  "redpanda_iam_resource_group_name": "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}",
  "redpanda_agent_identity_name": "agent-uai",
  "redpanda_agent_role_name": "agent-role",
  "redpanda_cert_manager_identity_name": "cert-manager-uai",
  "redpanda_external_dns_identity_name": "external-dns-uai",
  "redpanda_cluster_identity_name": "cluster-uai",
  "aks_identity_name": "aks-uai",
  "redpanda_console_identity_name": "console-uai",
  "redpanda_console_role_name": "console-role",
  "kafka_connect_identity_name": "",
  "redpanda_management_storage_account_name": "rpmgmtsa",
  "redpanda_management_storage_container_name": "rpmgmtsc",
  "redpanda_tiered_storage_account_name": "tieredsa",
  "redpanda_tiered_storage_container_name": "tieredsc",
  "redpanda_management_key_vault_name": "redpanda-vault",
  "redpanda_console_key_vault_name": "rp-console-vault",
  "redpanda_private_link_role_name": "pl-role",
  "vnet_name": "${AZURE_VNET_NAME}",
  "vnet_addresses": [
    "10.0.0.0/20"
  ],
  "private_subnets": {
    "agent-private": {
      "cidr": "10.0.3.0/24",
      "name": "snet-agent-private"
    },
    "connect-pod": {
      "cidr": "10.0.10.0/24",
      "name": "snet-connect-pods"
    },
    "connect-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.11.0/24",
      "name": "snet-connect-vnet"
    },
    "kafka-connect-pod": {
      "cidr": "10.0.12.0/24",
      "name": "snet-kafka-connect-pods"
    },
    "kafka-connect-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.13.0/24",
      "name": "snet-kafka-connect-vnet"
    },
    "rp-0-pods": {
      "cidr": "10.0.4.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-0-pods"
    },
    "rp-0-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.5.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-0-vnet"
    },
    "rp-1-pods": {
      "cidr": "10.0.6.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-1-pods"
    },
    "rp-1-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.7.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-1-vnet"
    },
    "rp-2-pods": {
      "cidr": "10.0.8.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-2-pods"
    },
    "rp-2-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.9.0/24",
      "name": "snet-rp-2-vnet"
    },
    "system-pod": {
      "cidr": "10.0.1.0/24",
      "name": "snet-system-pods"
    },
    "system-vnet": {
      "cidr": "10.0.2.0/24",
      "name": "snet-system-vnet"
    }
  },
  "egress_subnets": {
    "agent-public": {
      "cidr": "10.0.0.0/24",
      "name": "snet-agent-public"
    }
  },
  "reserved_subnet_cidrs": {
    "k8s-service": "10.0.15.0/24"
  },
  "redpanda_security_group_name": "redpanda-nsg"
}
EOF
```
====

== Deploy Terraform

Initialize, plan, and apply Terraform to set up the Azure infrastructure:

```bash
terraform init &&
terraform plan &&
terraform apply
```

Note the output values that the `terraform apply` command displays. The output values are necessary in later steps. To continue with cluster creation, see https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/tree/main/customer-managed/azure#create-azure-byo-vnet-redpanda-cluster[Create Azure VNet Redpanda Cluster^].

You can also get these values by running `terraform output`. For example:

.Show output from `terraform output`
[%collapsible]
====
```bash
agent_private_subnet_name = "my-snet-agent-private"
agent_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-agent-uai"
aks_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-aks-uai"
cert_manager_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-cert-manager-uai"
cluster_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-cluster-uai"
console_key_vault_name = "my-consolevault"
console_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-console-uai"
egress_subnet_name = "my-snet-agent-public"
external_dns_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-external-dns-uai"
iam_resource_group_name = "my-iam-rg"
kafka_connect_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-kafka-connect-pods"
kafka_connect_user_assigned_identity_name = "my-kafka-connect-uai"
kafka_connect_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-kafka-connect-vnet"
management_bucket_storage_account_name = "mymanagement"
management_bucket_storage_container_name = "mymanagement"
management_key_vault_name = "my-redpandavault"
network_resource_group_name = "my-network-rg"
......
redpanda_resource_group_name = "my-redpanda-rg"
redpanda_security_group_name = "my-redpanda-nsg"
......
rp_0_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-0-pods"
rp_0_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-0-vnet"
rp_1_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-1-pods"
rp_1_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-1-vnet"
rp_2_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-2-pods"
rp_2_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-rp-2-vnet"
rp_connect_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-connect-pods"
rp_connect_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-connect-vnet"
......
storage_resource_group_name = "my-storage-rg"
system_pods_subnet_name = "my-snet-system-pods"
system_vnet_subnet_name = "my-snet-system-vnet"
tiered_storage_account_name = "mytieredstorage"
tiered_storage_container_name = "mytieredstorage"
......
vnet_name = "my-rp-vnet"
```
====

The https://github.com/redpanda-data/cloud-examples/blob/main/customer-managed/azure/terraform/README.md[Terraform Readme] has more information about variable files: 

* `vars.azure.tf`: Contains the variables related to Azure credentials.
* `vars.condition.tf`: Contains the conditional variables; for example, on whether to create NAT.
* `vars.customer_input.tf`: Contains the variables needed to create a cluster with the Cloud API.
* `vars.iam.tf`: Contains the variables related to IAM roles.
* `vars.misc.tf`: Contains the variables, regions, zones, tags, and resource name prefix.

== Authenticate with Redpanda Cloud

Get a glossterm:bearer token[] from the Cloud API authentication endpoint using your Redpanda credentials:

```bash
export REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID=
export REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET=

export BEARER_TOKEN=$(curl --request POST \
--url 'https://auth.prd.cloud.redpanda.com/oauth/token' \
--header 'content-type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
--data grant_type=client_credentials \
--data client_id=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID} \
--data client_secret=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET} \
--data audience=cloudv2-production.redpanda.cloud | jq -r '.access_token')
```

TIP: To get the Redpanda authentication credentials, follow the xref:manage:api/cloud-api-quickstart.adoc[].

== Create network

To create the Redpanda network:

. Define a JSON file called `redpanda-network.json` to configure the network for Redpanda with details about VNet, subnets, and storage.
+
.Show script
[%collapsible]
====
```bash
cat > redpanda-network.json <<EOF 
{
  "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AZURE",
  "cluster_type": "TYPE_BYOC",
  "name": "$rp_cluster_name",
  "resource_group_id": "${REDPANDA_RG_ID}",
  "region": "${AZURE_REGION}",
   "customer_managed_resources": {
      "azure" : {
         "management_bucket" : {
            "storage_account_name": "${REDPANDA_MANAGEMENT_STORAGE_ACCOUNT}",
            "storage_container_name": "${REDPANDA_MANAGEMENT_STORAGE_CONTAINER}",
            "resource_group" : { "name" : "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}" }
         },
         "vnet" : {
            "name" : "${AZURE_VNET_NAME}",
            "resource_group" : { "name" : "${AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP_NAME}" }
         },
         "subnets" : {
            "rp_0_pods" : { "name" : "$rp_0_pods_subnet_name" },
            "rp_0_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_0_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "rp_1_pods" : { "name" : "$rp_1_pods_subnet_name" },
            "rp_1_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_2_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "rp_2_pods" : { "name" : "$rp_2_pods_subnet_name" },
            "rp_2_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_2_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "rp_connect_pods" : { "name" : "$rp_connect_pods_subnet_name" },
            "rp_connect_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_connect_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "kafka_connect_pods" : { "name" : "$kafka_connect_pods_subnet_name" },
            "kafka_connect_vnet" : { "name" : "$kafka_connect_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "sys_pods" : { "name" : "$system_pods_subnet_name" },
            "sys_vnet" : { "name" : "$system_vnet_subnet_name" },
            "rp_agent" :  { "name" : "$rp_agent_subnet_name" },
            "rp_egress_vnet" : { "name" : "$rp_egress_subnet_name" }
         }
      }
   }
}
EOF
```
====

. Use the Cloud API to create the network and retrieve the network ID:
+
```bash
export REDPANDA_NETWORK_ID=$(curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks" \
 -H "accept: application/json" \
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" \
 --data-binary @redpanda-network.json | jq -r '.operation.id')
```

== Create cluster

To create the Redpanda cluster:

. Define a JSON file called `redpanda-cluster.json` that includes cluster information:
+
.Show script
[%collapsible]
====
```bash
cat > redpanda-cluster.json <<EOF 
{
  "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AZURE",
  "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PRIVATE",
  "name": "$cluster_name",
  "resource_group_id": "$namespace_id",
  "network_id": "$network_id",
  "region": "$region",
  "zones": [ $zones ],
  "throughput_tier": "$tier",
  "type": "TYPE_BYOC",
  "customer_managed_resources" : {
     "azure" : {
       "cidrs" : {
          "aks_service_cidr" : "$aks_subnet_cidr"
       },
       "key_vaults": {
          "console_vault": { "name": "$redpanda_console_key_vault_name" },
          "management_vault": { "name": "$redpanda_management_key_vault_name" }
       },
       "resource_groups" : {
          "iam_resource_group" : { "name": "$redpanda_iam_resource_group_name" },
          "redpanda_resource_group" : { "name": "$redpanda_resource_group_name" },
          "storage_resource_group" : { "name": "$redpanda_storage_resource_group_name" }
       },
       "security_groups" : {
          "redpanda_security_group" : { "name": "$redpanda_security_group_name" }
       },
       "tiered_cloud_storage" : {
         "storage_account_name": "$redpanda_tiered_storage_account_name",
         "storage_container_name": "$redpanda_tiered_storage_container_name"
       },
       "user_assigned_identities" : {
         "agent_user_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$agent_user_assigned_identity_name" },
         "aks_user_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$aks_user_assigned_identity_name" },
         "cert_manager_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$cert_manager_assigned_identity_name" },
         "external_dns_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$external_dns_assigned_identity_name" },
         "redpanda_cluster_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$redpanda_cluster_assigned_identity_name" },
         "redpanda_console_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$redpanda_console_assigned_identity_name" },
         "kafka_connect_assigned_identity": { "name" : "$kafka_connect_assigned_identity_name" }
       }
     }
  }
}
EOF
```
====
+
TIP: See the full list of zones and tiers available with each provider in the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#api-description[Control Plane API reference].

. Make a Cloud API call to create a Redpanda network and get the network ID from the response in JSON `.operation.metadata.network_id`.
+
```bash
export REDPANDA_ID=$(curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\ 
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" \
 --data-binary @redpanda-cluster.json | jq -r '.operation.resource_id')
```

== Create cluster resources

To create the initial cluster resources, first log in to Redpanda Cloud, then run `rpk cloud byoc azure apply`:

```bash
rpk cloud login \
  --save \
  --client-id=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_ID} \
  --client-secret=${REDPANDA_CLIENT_SECRET} \
  --no-profile
```

```
rpk cloud byoc azure apply --redpanda-id="${REDPANDA_ID}" --subscription-id="${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}"
```

The Redpanda Cloud agent now is running and handles the remaining steps. This can take up to 45 minutes. When provisioning completes, the cluster status updates to `Running`. If the cluster remains in `Creating` status after 45 minutes, contact https://support.redpanda.com/hc/en-us/requests/new[Redpanda Support^].

== Check cluster status

Cluster creation is an example of an operation that can take a longer period of time to complete. You can check the operation state with the Cloud API, or check the Redpanda Cloud UI for cluster status.

Example using the returned `operation_id`:

```bash
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/operations/<operation-id>" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}"
```

Example retrieving cluster:

```bash
curl -X GET "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/<resource-id>" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}"
```

== Delete cluster

To delete the cluster, first send a DELETE request to the Cloud API, and retrieve the `resource_id` of the DELETE operation. Then run the `rpk` command to destroy the cluster identified by the `resource_id`.

```bash
export REDPANDA_ID=$(curl -X DELETE "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/${REDPANDA_ID}" \
 -H "accept: application/json"\
 -H "content-type: application/json" \
 -H "authorization: Bearer ${BEARER_TOKEN}" | jq -r '.operation.resource_id')
```

After that completes, run: 

```bash
rpk cloud byoc azure destroy --redpanda-id ${REDPANDA_ID}
```

include::get-started:partial$no-access.adoc[]
