modules/manage/partials/controlplane-api.adoc, before:

:tag-clusters: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Clusters
:tag-networks: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Networks
:tag-operations: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Operations
:tag-resource-groups: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Resource-Groups
:tag-serverless-regions: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Serverless-Regions
:tag-serverless-clusters: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Serverless-Clusters
:tag-role-bindings: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Control-Plane-Role-Bindings
:tag-users: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Control-Plane-Users
:tag-service-accounts: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Control-Plane-Service-Accounts

The Redpanda Cloud API is a collection of REST APIs that allow you to interact with different parts of Redpanda Cloud. The Control Plane API enables you to programmatically manage your organization's Redpanda infrastructure outside of the Cloud UI. You can call the API endpoints directly, or use tools like Terraform or Python scripts to automate cluster management.

See xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc[Control Plane API] for the full API reference documentation.

== Control Plane API

The Control Plane API is one central API that allows you to provision clusters, networks, and resource groups.

The Control Plane API consists of the following endpoint groups:

ifndef::env-serverless[]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-clusters}[Clusters\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-networks}[Networks\]]
endif::[]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-operations}[Operations\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-resource-groups}[Resource Groups\]]
ifdef::env-serverless[]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-serverless-clusters}[Serverless Clusters\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-serverless-regions}[Serverless Regions\]]
endif::[]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-role-bindings}[Control Plane Role Bindings\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-users}[Control Plane Users\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-service-accounts}[Control Plane Service Accounts\]]

// For serverless, show this section at the end of the doc
ifndef::env-serverless[]
[[lro]]
== Long-running operations

Some endpoints do not directly return the resource itself, but instead return an operation. The following is an example response of xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/clusters[`POST /clusters`]:

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
{
    "operation": {
        "id": "cqfc6vdmvio001r4vu4",
        "metadata": {
            "@type": "type.googleapis.com/redpanda.api.controlplane.v1.CreateClusterMetadata",
            "cluster_id": "cqg168balf4e4pm8ptu"
        },
        "state": "STATE_IN_PROGRESS",
        "started_at": "2024-07-23T20:31:29.948Z",
        "type": "TYPE_CREATE_CLUSTER",
        "resource_id": "cqg168balf4e4pm8ptu"
    }
}
----

The response object represents the long-running operation of creating a cluster. Cluster creation is an example of an operation that can take a longer period of time to complete.

=== Check operation state

To check the progress of an operation, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/operations/-id-[`GET /operations/\{id}`] endpoint using the operation ID as a parameter: 

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/operations/<operation-id>
```

TIP: When using a shell substitution variable for the token, use double quotes to wrap the header value.

The response contains the current state of the operation: `IN_PROGRESS`, `COMPLETED`, or `FAILED`.

== Cluster tiers

When you create a BYOC or Dedicated cluster, you select a usage tier. Each tier provides tested and guaranteed workload configurations for throughput, partitions (pre-replication), and connections. Availability depends on the region and the cluster type. See the full list of regions, zones, and tiers available with each provider in the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#api-description[Control Plane API reference].

endif::[]

== Create a cluster

ifndef::env-serverless[]
To create a new cluster, first create a resource group and network, if you have not already done so.

=== Create a resource group 

Create a resource group by making a POST request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/resource-groups[`/v1/resource-groups`] endpoint. Pass a name for your resource group in the request body.

[,bash]
----
curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
-d '{
  "name": "<resource-group-name>"
}' -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups
----

A resource group ID is returned. Pass this ID later when you call the Create Cluster endpoint.

=== Create a network

Create a network by making a request to xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/networks[`POST /v1/networks`].

Choose a xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR range] that does not overlap with your existing VPCs or your Redpanda network.

[,bash]
----
curl -d \
'{
  "cidr_block": "10.0.0.0/20",
  "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
  "cluster_type": "TYPE_DEDICATED",
  "name": "<network-name>",
  "resource_group_id": "<resource-group-id>",
  "region": "us-west1"
}' -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks 
----

This endpoint returns a <<lro,long-running operation>>. 

=== Create a new cluster

After the network is created, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/clusters[`POST /v1/clusters`] with the resource group ID and network ID in the request body. 

[,bash]
----
curl -d \
'{
  "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
  "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PUBLIC",
  "name": "my-new-cluster",
  "resource_group_id": "<resource-group-id>",
  "network_id": "<network-id>",
  "region": "us-west1",
  "throughput_tier": "tier-1-gcp-um4g",
  "type": "TYPE_DEDICATED",
  "zones": [
    "us-west1-a",
    "us-west1-b",
    "us-west1-c"
    ]
  }' -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters
----

The Create Cluster endpoint returns a <<lro,long-running operation>>. When the operation completes, you can retrieve cluster details by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1/clusters/\{id}`], and passing the cluster ID as a parameter.

ifdef::env-byoc[]
==== Additional steps to create a BYOC cluster

. Ensure that you have installed `rpk`.
. After making a Create Cluster request, run `rpk cloud byoc`. Pass `metadata.cluster_id` from the Create Cluster response:
+
[tabs]
====
AWS::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc aws apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id>
```
--
Azure::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc azure apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id> --subscription-id=<redpanda-cluster-azure-subscription-id>
```
--
GCP::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id> --project-id=<gcp-project-id>
```
--
====
endif::[]
endif::[]

ifdef::env-serverless[]
To create a new serverless cluster, you can use the default resource group, or create a new resource group if you like. You need to choose a region where your cluster is hosted.

=== Create a resource group 

[NOTE]
====
This step is optional. Serverless includes a default resource group. To retrieve the default resource group ID, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/resource-groups[`/v1/resource-groups`] endpoint:

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups
```

====

Create a resource group by making a POST request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/resource-groups[`/v1/resource-groups`] endpoint. Pass a name for your resource group in the request body.

[,bash]
----
curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
-d '{
  "name": "<serverless-resource-group-name>"
}' -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups
----

A resource group ID is returned. Pass this ID later when you call the Create Serverless Cluster endpoint.

=== Choose a region

To see the available regions for Redpanda Serverless, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/serverless/regions[`/v1/serverless/regions`] endpoint. You can specify a cloud provider in your request. Serverless currently only supports AWS.

[,bash]
----
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" 'https://api.redpanda.com/v1/serverless/regions?cloud_provider=CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS'
----

TIP: When using a shell substitution variable for the token, use double quotes to wrap the header value.

[,json,role=no-copy]
----
{
    "serverless_regions": [
        {
            "name": "pro-eu-central-1",
            "display_name": "eu-central-1",
            "default_timezone": {
                "id": "Europe/Berlin",
                "version": ""
            },
            "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
            "available": true
        },
        {
            "name": "pro-us-east-1",
            "display_name": "us-east-1",
            "default_timezone": {
                "id": "America/New_York",
                "version": ""
            },
            "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
            "available": true
        }
    ],
    "next_page_token": ""
}
----


=== Create a new serverless cluster

Create a Serverless cluster by making a request to xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/serverless/clusters[`POST /v1/serverless/clusters`] with the resource group ID and serverless region name in the request body. 

[,bash]
----
curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
-d '{
  "name": <serverless-cluster-name>,
  "resource_group_id": <resource-group-id>,
  "serverless_region": "pro-us-east-1"
}' -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/serverless/clusters
----

The Create Serverless Cluster endpoint returns a <<lro-serverless,long-running operation>>. When the operation completes, you can retrieve cluster details by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/serverless/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1/serverless/clusters/\{id}`], and passing the cluster ID as a parameter.

endif::[]

== Delete a cluster

ifndef::env-serverless[]

To delete a cluster, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/clusters/-id-[`DELETE /v1/clusters/\{id}`] endpoint, passing the cluster ID as a parameter. This is a <<lro,long-running operation>>.

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" -X DELETE https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/<cluster_id>
```

ifdef::env-byoc[]
=== Additional steps to delete a BYOC cluster

. Make a request to xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1/clusters/\{id}`] to check the state of the cluster. Wait until the state is `STATE_DELETING_AGENT`.
. After the state changes to `STATE_DELETING_AGENT`, run `rpk cloud byoc` to destroy the agent.
+
[tabs]
====
AWS::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc aws destroy --redpanda-id=<cluster-id>
```
--
Azure::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc azure destroy --redpanda-id=<cluster-id> 
```
--
GCP::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp destroy --redpanda-id=<cluster-id> --project-id=<gcp-project-id>
```
--
====

. When the cluster is deleted, the delete operation’s state changes to `STATE_COMPLETED`. At this point, you may make a DELETE request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/networks/-id-[`/v1/networks/\{id}`] endpoint to delete the network. This is a long running operation.
. Optional: After the network is deleted, make a request to xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/resource-groups/-id-[`DELETE /v1/resource-groups/\{id}`] to delete the resource group. 

endif::[]
endif::[]

ifdef::env-serverless[]

To delete a cluster, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/serverless/clusters/-id-[`DELETE /v1/serverless/clusters/\{id}`] endpoint, passing the cluster ID as a parameter. This is a <<lro-serverless,long-running operation>>.

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" -X DELETE https://api.redpanda.com/v1/serverless/clusters/<cluster-id>
```

Optional: When the cluster is deleted, the delete operation’s state changes to `STATE_COMPLETED`. At this point, you may make a DELETE request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/resource-groups/-id-[`/v1/resource-groups/\{id}`] endpoint to delete the resource group. 

[[lro-serverless]]
== Long-running operations

Some endpoints do not directly return the resource itself, but instead return an operation. The following is an example response of xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/serverless/clusters[`POST /serverless/clusters`]:

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
{
    "operation": {
        "id": "cqaramrndjr40k3qei50",
        "metadata": null,
        "state": "STATE_IN_PROGRESS",
        "started_at": {
            "seconds": "1721087323",
            "nanos": 888601218
        },
        "finished_at": null,
        "type": "TYPE_CREATE_SERVERLESS_CLUSTER"
    }
}
----

The response object represents the long-running operation of creating a cluster. Cluster creation is an example of an operation that can take a longer period of time to complete.

=== Check operation state

To check the progress of an operation, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/operations/-id-[`GET /operations/\{id}`] endpoint using the operation ID as a parameter: 

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/operations/<operation-id>
```

The response contains the current state of the operation: `IN_PROGRESS`, `COMPLETED`, or `FAILED`.

endif::[]

== Manage RBAC

The endpoints for managing xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc[RBAC configurations], for example assigning xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc#predefined-roles[roles] to a users and service accounts in the control plane, contain the version string `v1alpha1` in the path. 

=== List role bindings

To see role assignments for IAM user and service accounts, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1alpha1/role-bindings[`/v1/role-bindings`] endpoint.

[,bash]
----
curl https://api.redpanda.com/v1/role-bindings?filter.role_name=<role-name>&filter.scope.resource_type=SCOPE_RESOURCE_TYPE_CLUSTER \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----

=== Get role binding

To see roles assignments for a specific IAM account, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1alpha1/role-bindings/-id-[`/v1/role-bindings/\{id}`] endpoint, passing the role binding ID as a parameter.

[,bash]
----
curl "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/role-bindings/<role-binding-id> \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----

=== Get user

To see details of an IAM user account, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1alpha1/users/-id-[`/v1/users/\{id}`] endpoint, passing the user account ID as a parameter.

[,bash]
----
curl "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/users/<user-account-id> \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----

=== Create role binding

To assign a role to an IAM user or service account, make a POST request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1alpha1/role-bindings[`/v1/role-bindings`] endpoint. Specify the role and scope, which includes the specific resource ID and an optional resource type, in the request body.

[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/role-bindings" \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
           "role_name": "<role-name>",
           "account_id": "<user-or-service-account-id>",
           "scope": {
             "resource_type": "SCOPE_RESOURCE_TYPE_CLUSTER",
             "resource_id": "<resource-id>"
           }
         }'
----

=== Create service account

NOTE: Service accounts are assigned the Admin role for all resources in the organization.

To create a new service account, make a POST request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1alpha1/service-accounts[`/v1/service-accounts`] endpoint, with a service account name and optional description in the request body.

[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/service-accounts" \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
           "service_account": {
              "name": "<service-account-name>",
              "description": "<service-account-description>"
           }
         }'
----


== Next steps

- xref:./cloud-dataplane-api.adoc[]

Commit message:

Create role binding call takes predefined role names

modules/manage/partials/controlplane-api.adoc, after:

:tag-clusters: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Clusters
:tag-networks: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Networks
:tag-operations: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Operations
:tag-resource-groups: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Resource-Groups
:tag-serverless-regions: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Serverless-Regions
:tag-serverless-clusters: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Serverless-Clusters
:tag-role-bindings: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Control-Plane-Role-Bindings
:tag-users: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Control-Plane-Users
:tag-service-accounts: api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#tag--Control-Plane-Service-Accounts

The Redpanda Cloud API is a collection of REST APIs that allow you to interact with different parts of Redpanda Cloud. The Control Plane API enables you to programmatically manage your organization's Redpanda infrastructure outside of the Cloud UI. You can call the API endpoints directly, or use tools like Terraform or Python scripts to automate cluster management.

See xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc[Control Plane API] for the full API reference documentation.

== Control Plane API

The Control Plane API is one central API that allows you to provision clusters, networks, and resource groups.

The Control Plane API consists of the following endpoint groups:

ifndef::env-serverless[]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-clusters}[Clusters\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-networks}[Networks\]]
endif::[]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-operations}[Operations\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-resource-groups}[Resource Groups\]]
ifdef::env-serverless[]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-serverless-clusters}[Serverless Clusters\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-serverless-regions}[Serverless Regions\]]
endif::[]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-role-bindings}[Control Plane Role Bindings\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-users}[Control Plane Users\]]
* pass:a,m[xref:{tag-service-accounts}[Control Plane Service Accounts\]]

// For serverless, show this section at the end of the doc
ifndef::env-serverless[]
[[lro]]
== Long-running operations

Some endpoints do not directly return the resource itself, but instead return an operation. The following is an example response of xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/clusters[`POST /clusters`]:

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
{
    "operation": {
        "id": "cqfc6vdmvio001r4vu4",
        "metadata": {
            "@type": "type.googleapis.com/redpanda.api.controlplane.v1.CreateClusterMetadata",
            "cluster_id": "cqg168balf4e4pm8ptu"
        },
        "state": "STATE_IN_PROGRESS",
        "started_at": "2024-07-23T20:31:29.948Z",
        "type": "TYPE_CREATE_CLUSTER",
        "resource_id": "cqg168balf4e4pm8ptu"
    }
}
----

The response object represents the long-running operation of creating a cluster. Cluster creation is an example of an operation that can take a longer period of time to complete.

=== Check operation state

To check the progress of an operation, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/operations/-id-[`GET /operations/\{id}`] endpoint using the operation ID as a parameter: 

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/operations/<operation-id>
```

TIP: When using a shell substitution variable for the token, use double quotes to wrap the header value.

The response contains the current state of the operation: `IN_PROGRESS`, `COMPLETED`, or `FAILED`.

== Cluster tiers

When you create a BYOC or Dedicated cluster, you select a usage tier. Each tier provides tested and guaranteed workload configurations for throughput, partitions (pre-replication), and connections. Availability depends on the region and the cluster type. See the full list of regions, zones, and tiers available with each provider in the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#api-description[Control Plane API reference].

endif::[]

== Create a cluster

ifndef::env-serverless[]
To create a new cluster, first create a resource group and network, if you have not already done so.

=== Create a resource group 

Create a resource group by making a POST request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/resource-groups[`/v1/resource-groups`] endpoint. Pass a name for your resource group in the request body.

[,bash]
----
curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
-d '{
  "name": "<resource-group-name>"
}' -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups
----

A resource group ID is returned. Pass this ID later when you call the Create Cluster endpoint.

=== Create a network

Create a network by making a request to xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/networks[`POST /v1/networks`].

Choose a xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR range] that does not overlap with your existing VPCs or your Redpanda network.

[,bash]
----
curl -d \
'{
  "cidr_block": "10.0.0.0/20",
  "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
  "cluster_type": "TYPE_DEDICATED",
  "name": "<network-name>",
  "resource_group_id": "<resource-group-id>",
  "region": "us-west1"
}' -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/networks 
----

This endpoint returns a <<lro,long-running operation>>. 

=== Create a new cluster

After the network is created, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/clusters[`POST /v1/clusters`] with the resource group ID and network ID in the request body. 

[,bash]
----
curl -d \
'{
  "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_GCP",
  "connection_type": "CONNECTION_TYPE_PUBLIC",
  "name": "my-new-cluster",
  "resource_group_id": "<resource-group-id>",
  "network_id": "<network-id>",
  "region": "us-west1",
  "throughput_tier": "tier-1-gcp-um4g",
  "type": "TYPE_DEDICATED",
  "zones": [
    "us-west1-a",
    "us-west1-b",
    "us-west1-c"
    ]
  }' -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters
----

The Create Cluster endpoint returns a <<lro,long-running operation>>. When the operation completes, you can retrieve cluster details by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1/clusters/\{id}`], and passing the cluster ID as a parameter.

ifdef::env-byoc[]
==== Additional steps to create a BYOC cluster

. Ensure that you have installed `rpk`.
. After making a Create Cluster request, run `rpk cloud byoc`. Pass `metadata.cluster_id` from the Create Cluster response:
+
[tabs]
====
AWS::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc aws apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id>
```
--
Azure::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc azure apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id> --subscription-id=<redpanda-cluster-azure-subscription-id>
```
--
GCP::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp apply --redpanda-id=<metadata.cluster_id> --project-id=<gcp-project-id>
```
--
====
endif::[]
endif::[]

ifdef::env-serverless[]
To create a new serverless cluster, you can use the default resource group, or create a new resource group if you like. You need to choose a region where your cluster is hosted.

=== Create a resource group 

[NOTE]
====
This step is optional. Serverless includes a default resource group. To retrieve the default resource group ID, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/resource-groups[`/v1/resource-groups`] endpoint:

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups
```

====

Create a resource group by making a POST request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/resource-groups[`/v1/resource-groups`] endpoint. Pass a name for your resource group in the request body.

[,bash]
----
curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
-d '{
  "name": "<serverless-resource-group-name>"
}' -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/resource-groups
----

A resource group ID is returned. Pass this ID later when you call the Create Serverless Cluster endpoint.

=== Choose a region

To see the available regions for Redpanda Serverless, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/serverless/regions[`/v1/serverless/regions`] endpoint. You can specify a cloud provider in your request. Serverless currently only supports AWS.

[,bash]
----
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" 'https://api.redpanda.com/v1/serverless/regions?cloud_provider=CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS'
----

TIP: When using a shell substitution variable for the token, use double quotes to wrap the header value.

[,json,role=no-copy]
----
{
    "serverless_regions": [
        {
            "name": "pro-eu-central-1",
            "display_name": "eu-central-1",
            "default_timezone": {
                "id": "Europe/Berlin",
                "version": ""
            },
            "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
            "available": true
        },
        {
            "name": "pro-us-east-1",
            "display_name": "us-east-1",
            "default_timezone": {
                "id": "America/New_York",
                "version": ""
            },
            "cloud_provider": "CLOUD_PROVIDER_AWS",
            "available": true
        }
    ],
    "next_page_token": ""
}
----


=== Create a new serverless cluster

Create a Serverless cluster by making a request to xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/serverless/clusters[`POST /v1/serverless/clusters`] with the resource group ID and serverless region name in the request body. 

[,bash]
----
curl -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
-d '{
  "name": <serverless-cluster-name>,
  "resource_group_id": <resource-group-id>,
  "serverless_region": "pro-us-east-1"
}' -X POST https://api.redpanda.com/v1/serverless/clusters
----

The Create Serverless Cluster endpoint returns a <<lro-serverless,long-running operation>>. When the operation completes, you can retrieve cluster details by calling xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/serverless/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1/serverless/clusters/\{id}`], and passing the cluster ID as a parameter.

endif::[]

== Delete a cluster

ifndef::env-serverless[]

To delete a cluster, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/clusters/-id-[`DELETE /v1/clusters/\{id}`] endpoint, passing the cluster ID as a parameter. This is a <<lro,long-running operation>>.

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" -X DELETE https://api.redpanda.com/v1/clusters/<cluster_id>
```

ifdef::env-byoc[]
=== Additional steps to delete a BYOC cluster

. Make a request to xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/clusters/-id-[`GET /v1/clusters/\{id}`] to check the state of the cluster. Wait until the state is `STATE_DELETING_AGENT`.
. After the state changes to `STATE_DELETING_AGENT`, run `rpk cloud byoc` to destroy the agent.
+
[tabs]
====
AWS::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc aws destroy --redpanda-id=<cluster-id>
```
--
Azure::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc azure destroy --redpanda-id=<cluster-id> 
```
--
GCP::
+
--
```bash
rpk cloud byoc gcp destroy --redpanda-id=<cluster-id> --project-id=<gcp-project-id>
```
--
====

. When the cluster is deleted, the delete operation’s state changes to `STATE_COMPLETED`. At this point, you may make a DELETE request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/networks/-id-[`/v1/networks/\{id}`] endpoint to delete the network. This is a long running operation.
. Optional: After the network is deleted, make a request to xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/resource-groups/-id-[`DELETE /v1/resource-groups/\{id}`] to delete the resource group. 

endif::[]
endif::[]

ifdef::env-serverless[]

To delete a cluster, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/serverless/clusters/-id-[`DELETE /v1/serverless/clusters/\{id}`] endpoint, passing the cluster ID as a parameter. This is a <<lro-serverless,long-running operation>>.

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" -X DELETE https://api.redpanda.com/v1/serverless/clusters/<cluster-id>
```

Optional: When the cluster is deleted, the delete operation’s state changes to `STATE_COMPLETED`. At this point, you may make a DELETE request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#delete-/v1/resource-groups/-id-[`/v1/resource-groups/\{id}`] endpoint to delete the resource group. 

[[lro-serverless]]
== Long-running operations

Some endpoints do not directly return the resource itself, but instead return an operation. The following is an example response of xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1/serverless/clusters[`POST /serverless/clusters`]:

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
{
    "operation": {
        "id": "cqaramrndjr40k3qei50",
        "metadata": null,
        "state": "STATE_IN_PROGRESS",
        "started_at": {
            "seconds": "1721087323",
            "nanos": 888601218
        },
        "finished_at": null,
        "type": "TYPE_CREATE_SERVERLESS_CLUSTER"
    }
}
----

The response object represents the long-running operation of creating a cluster. Cluster creation is an example of an operation that can take a longer period of time to complete.

=== Check operation state

To check the progress of an operation, make a request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1/operations/-id-[`GET /operations/\{id}`] endpoint using the operation ID as a parameter: 

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" https://api.redpanda.com/v1/operations/<operation-id>
```

The response contains the current state of the operation: `IN_PROGRESS`, `COMPLETED`, or `FAILED`.

endif::[]

== Manage RBAC

The endpoints for managing xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc[RBAC configurations], for example assigning xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc#predefined-roles[roles] to a users and service accounts in the control plane, contain the version string `v1alpha1` in the path. 

=== List role bindings

To see role assignments for IAM user and service accounts, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1alpha1/role-bindings[`/v1/role-bindings`] endpoint.

[,bash]
----
curl https://api.redpanda.com/v1/role-bindings?filter.role_name=<role-name>&filter.scope.resource_type=SCOPE_RESOURCE_TYPE_CLUSTER \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----

=== Get role binding

To see roles assignments for a specific IAM account, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1alpha1/role-bindings/-id-[`/v1/role-bindings/\{id}`] endpoint, passing the role binding ID as a parameter.

[,bash]
----
curl "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/role-bindings/<role-binding-id> \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----

=== Get user

To see details of an IAM user account, make a GET request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#get-/v1alpha1/users/-id-[`/v1/users/\{id}`] endpoint, passing the user account ID as a parameter.

[,bash]
----
curl "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/users/<user-account-id> \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json"
----

=== Create role binding

To assign a role to an IAM user or service account, make a POST request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1alpha1/role-bindings[`/v1/role-bindings`] endpoint. Specify the role and scope, which includes the specific resource ID and an optional resource type, in the request body.

[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/role-bindings" \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
           "role_name": "<role-name>",
           "account_id": "<user-or-service-account-id>",
           "scope": {
             "resource_type": "SCOPE_RESOURCE_TYPE_CLUSTER",
             "resource_id": "<resource-id>"
           }
         }'
----

For `<role-name>`, use one of roles listed in xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc#predefined-roles[Predefined roles] (`Reader`, `Writer`, `Admin`).

=== Create service account

NOTE: Service accounts are assigned the Admin role for all resources in the organization.

To create a new service account, make a POST request to the xref:api:ROOT:cloud-controlplane-api.adoc#post-/v1alpha1/service-accounts[`/v1/service-accounts`] endpoint, with a service account name and optional description in the request body.

[,bash]
----
curl -X POST "https://api.redpanda.com/v1/service-accounts" \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <token>" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
           "service_account": {
              "name": "<service-account-name>",
              "description": "<service-account-description>"
           }
         }'
----


== Next steps

- xref:./cloud-dataplane-api.adoc[]
