modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/byoc/gcp/create-byoc-cluster-gcp.adoc, before:

= Create a BYOC Cluster on GCP
:description: Use the Redpanda Cloud UI to create a BYOC cluster on GCP.
:page-aliases: get-started:cluster-types/byoc/create-byoc-cluster-gcp.adoc, cloud:create-byoc-cluster-gcp.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/create-byoc-cluster-gcp

To create a Redpanda cluster in your virtual private cloud (VPC), follow the instructions in the Redpanda Cloud UI. The UI contains the parameters necessary to successfully run `rpk cloud byoc apply`. See also: xref:get-started:byoc-arch.adoc[BYOC architecture].

NOTE: With standard BYOC clusters, Redpanda manages security policies and resources for your VPC, including subnetworks, service accounts, IAM roles, firewall rules, and storage buckets. For the highest level of security, you can manage these resources yourself with a xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc[BYOVPC cluster on GCP].

If your clients need to connect from different GCP regions than where your cluster will be deployed, you must enable global access during cluster creation using the Cloud API. To create a BYOC cluster with global access enabled, see xref:networking:byoc/gcp/enable-global-access.adoc[Enable Global Access].

== Create a BYOC cluster

. Log in to https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud^].
. On the Clusters page, click *Create cluster*, then click *Create BYOC cluster*.
+
Enter a cluster name, then select the resource group, provider (GCP), xref:reference:tiers/byoc-tiers.adoc[region, tier], availability, and Redpanda version.
+
[NOTE]
====
* If you plan to create a private network in your own VPC, select the region where your VPC is located.
* Three availability zones provide two backups in case one availability zone goes down.
====
+ 
Optionally, click *Advanced settings* to specify up to five key-value custom labels. After the cluster is created, the labels are applied to all GCP resources associated with this cluster. For more information, see the https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/labeling-resources[GCP documentation^].

. Click *Next*.
. On the Network page, enter the connection type: either *Public* or *Private*. For BYOC clusters, *Private* is best-practice.
** Your network name is used to identify this network.
** For a xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR range], choose one that does not overlap with your existing VPCs or your Redpanda network.
. Click *Next*.
. On the Deploy page, follow the steps to log in to Redpanda Cloud and deploy the agent.
+
Note that `rpk` configures the permissions required by the agent to provision and actively maintain the cluster. For details about these permissions, see xref:security:authorization/cloud-iam-policies-gcp.adoc[GCP IAM permissions].

include::get-started:partial$no-access.adoc[]

== Next steps

xref:networking:byoc/gcp/index.adoc[Configure private networking]

Commit message:

DOC-1538 BYOC customer tags after cluster creation (#400)
* DOC-1538 BYOC customer tags after cluster creation

* edits + add to What's New

* incorporate coderabbit suggestions

* incorporate Paul's feedback

* fix what's new links

* incorporate review feedback + minor edits

* Update modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/byoc/aws/vpc-byo-aws.adoc

Co-authored-by: Joyce Fee <102751339+Feediver1@users.noreply.github.com>

* Update modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/byoc/gcp/create-byoc-cluster-gcp.adoc

Co-authored-by: Joyce Fee <102751339+Feediver1@users.noreply.github.com>

* incorporate doc review feedback

---------

Co-authored-by: Joyce Fee <102751339+Feediver1@users.noreply.github.com>

modules/get-started/pages/cluster-types/byoc/gcp/create-byoc-cluster-gcp.adoc, after:

= Create a BYOC Cluster on GCP
:description: Use the Redpanda Cloud UI to create a BYOC cluster on GCP.
:page-aliases: get-started:cluster-types/byoc/create-byoc-cluster-gcp.adoc, cloud:create-byoc-cluster-gcp.adoc, deploy:deployment-option/cloud/create-byoc-cluster-gcp

To create a Redpanda cluster in your virtual private cloud (VPC), follow the instructions in the Redpanda Cloud UI. The UI contains the parameters necessary to successfully run `rpk cloud byoc apply`. See also: xref:get-started:byoc-arch.adoc[BYOC architecture].

NOTE: With standard BYOC clusters, Redpanda manages security policies and resources for your VPC, including subnetworks, service accounts, IAM roles, firewall rules, and storage buckets. For the highest level of security, you can manage these resources yourself with a xref:get-started:cluster-types/byoc/gcp/vpc-byo-gcp.adoc[BYOVPC cluster on GCP].

If your clients need to connect from different GCP regions than where your cluster will be deployed, you must enable global access during cluster creation using the Cloud API. To create a BYOC cluster with global access enabled, see xref:networking:byoc/gcp/enable-global-access.adoc[Enable Global Access].

== Create a BYOC cluster

. Log in to https://cloud.redpanda.com[Redpanda Cloud^].
. On the Clusters page, click *Create cluster*, then click *Create BYOC cluster*.
+
Enter a cluster name, then select the resource group, provider (GCP), xref:reference:tiers/byoc-tiers.adoc[region, tier], availability, and Redpanda version.
+
[NOTE]
====
* If you plan to create a private network in your own VPC, select the region where your VPC is located.
* Three availability zones provide two backups in case one availability zone goes down.
====
+
Optionally, click *Advanced settings* to specify up to five key-value custom GCP labels. If a label key starts with `gcp.network-tag.<tag>`, then the agent interprets it as a request to apply the `<tag>` https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/add-remove-network-tags[network tag^] to GCE instances in the cluster. Use labels for organization/metadata; use network tags to target firewall rules and routes. After the cluster is created, labels are applied to applicable GCP resources (for example, instances and disks), and network tags are applied to instances. For more information, see the https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/labeling-resources[GCP documentation^]. After the cluster is created, you can <<manage-custom-resource-labels-and-network-tags,specify more labels with the Cloud API>>. 
. Click *Next*.
. On the Network page, enter the connection type: either *Public* or *Private*. For BYOC clusters, *Private* is best-practice.
** Your network name is used to identify this network.
** For a xref:networking:cidr-ranges.adoc[CIDR range], choose one that does not overlap with your existing VPCs or your Redpanda network.
. Click *Next*.
. On the Deploy page, follow the steps to log in to Redpanda Cloud and deploy the agent.
+
Note that `rpk` configures the permissions required by the agent to provision and actively maintain the cluster. For details about these permissions, see xref:security:authorization/cloud-iam-policies-gcp.adoc[GCP IAM permissions].

include::get-started:partial$no-access.adoc[]

== Manage custom resource labels and network tags

include::get-started:partial$custom-tags-gcp.adoc[]

== Next steps

xref:networking:byoc/gcp/index.adoc[Configure private networking]
